<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Antigone</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="antigone" epub:type="z3998:drama z3998:scene">
			<p><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Antigone</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ismene</b> before the Palace gates.</p>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antigone</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ismene, sister of my blood and heart,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>See’st thou how Zeus would in our lives fulfil</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The weird of Oedipus, a world of woes!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For what of pain, affliction, outrage, shame,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is lacking in our fortunes, thine and mine?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And now this proclamation of today</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Made by our Captain-General to the State,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What can its purport be? Didst hear and heed,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or art thou deaf when friends are banned as foes?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ismene</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>To me, Antigone, no word of friends</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Has come, or glad or grievous, since we twain</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Were reft of our two brethren in one day</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By double fratricide; and since i’ the night</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Our Argive leaguers fled, no later news</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Has reached me, to inspirit or deject.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antigone</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I knew ’twas so, and therefore summoned thee</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Beyond the gates to breathe it in thine ear.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ismene</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What is it? Some dark secret stirs thy breast.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antigone</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What but the thought of our two brothers dead,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The one by Creon graced with funeral rites,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The other disappointed? Eteocles</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He hath consigned to earth (as fame reports)</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With obsequies that use and wont ordain,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So gracing him among the dead below.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But Polyneices, a dishonoured corse,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>(So by report the royal edict runs)</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No man may bury him or make lament⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Must leave him tombless and unwept, a feast</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For kites to scent afar and swoop upon.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Such is the edict (if report speak true)</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of Creon, our most noble Creon, aimed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>At thee and me, aye me too; and anon</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He will be here to promulgate, for such</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As have not heard, his mandate; ’tis in sooth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No passing humour, for the edict says</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whoe’er transgresses shall be stoned to death.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So stands it with us; now ’tis thine to show</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If thou art worthy of thy blood or base.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ismene</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>But how, my rash, fond sister, in such case</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Can I do anything to make or mar?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antigone</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Say, wilt thou aid me and abet? Decide.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ismene</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>In what bold venture? What is in thy thought?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antigone</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Lend me a hand to bear the corpse away.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ismene</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What, bury him despite the interdict?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antigone</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>My brother, and, though thou deny him, thine.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No man shall say that <em>I</em> betrayed a brother.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ismene</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Wilt thou persist, though Creon has forbid?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antigone</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What right has he to keep me from my own?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ismene</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Bethink thee, sister, of our father’s fate,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Abhorred, dishonoured, self-convinced of sin,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Blinded, himself his executioner.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Think of his mother-wife (ill-sorted names)</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Done by a noose herself had twined to death.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And last, our hapless brethren in one day,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Both in a mutual destiny involved,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Self-slaughtered, both the slayer and the slain.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Bethink thee, sister, we are left alone;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shall we not perish wretchedest of all.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If in defiance of the law we cross</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A monarch’s will?⁠—weak women, think of that,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Not framed by nature to contend with men.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Remember this too that the stronger rules;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We must obey his orders, these or worse.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Therefore I plead compulsion and entreat</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The dead to pardon. I perforce obey</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The powers that be. ’Tis foolishness, I ween,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To overstep in aught the golden mean.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antigone</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I urge no more; nay, wert thou willing still,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I would not welcome such a fellowship.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Go thine own way; myself will bury him.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>How sweet to die in such employ, to rest⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sister and brother linked in love’s embrace⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A sinless sinner, banned awhile on earth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But by the dead commended; and with them</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I shall abide for ever. As for thee,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Scorn, if thou wilt, the eternal laws of Heaven.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ismene</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I scorn them not, but to defy the State</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or break her ordinance I have no skill.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antigone</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>A specious pretext. I will go alone</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To lap my dearest brother in the grave.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ismene</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>My poor, fond sister, how I fear for thee!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antigone</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O waste no fears on me; look to thyself.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ismene</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>At least let no man know of thine intent,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But keep it close and secret, as will I.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antigone</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O tell it, sister; I shall hate thee more</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If thou proclaim it not to all the town.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ismene</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou hast a fiery soul for numbing work.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antigone</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I pleasure those whom I would liefest please.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ismene</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>If thou succeed; but thou art doomed to fail.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antigone</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>When strength shall fail me, yes, but not before.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ismene</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>But, if the venture’s hopeless, why essay?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antigone</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Sister, forbear, or I shall hate thee soon,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And the dead man will hate thee too, with cause.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Say I am mad and give my madness rein</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To wreck itself; the worst that can befall</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is but to die an honourable death.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ismene</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Have thine own way then; ’tis a mad endeavour,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yet to thy lovers thou art dear as ever. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Strophe 1</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>Sunbeam, of all that ever dawn upon</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i5">Our seven-gated Thebes the brightest ray,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i7">O eye of golden day,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How fair thy light o’er Dircè’s fountain shone,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Speeding upon their headlong homeward course,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Far quicker than they came, the Argive force;</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i7">Putting to flight</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The argent shields, the host with scutcheons white.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Against our land the proud invader came</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To vindicate fell Polyneices’ claim.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i5">Like to an eagle swooping low,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i5">On pinions white as new fall’n snow,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With clanging scream, a horsetail plume his crest,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The aspiring lord of Argos onward pressed.</span>
								</p>
							</div>
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Antistrophe 1</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>Hovering around our city walls he waits,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His spearmen raven at our seven gates.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But ere a torch our crown of towers could burn,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ere they had tasted of our blood, they turn</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Forced by the Dragon; in their rear</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The din of Ares panic-struck they hear.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For Zeus who hates the braggart’s boast</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Beheld that gold-bespangled host;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As at the goal the paean they upraise,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He struck them with his forkèd lightning blaze.</span>
								</p>
							</div>
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Strophe 2</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>To earthy from earth rebounding, down he crashed;</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">The fire-brand from his impious hand was dashed,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As like a Bacchic reveller on he came,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Outbreathing hate and flame,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And tottered. Elsewhere in the field,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here, there, great Ares like a war-horse wheeled,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i7">Beneath his car down thrust</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i7">Our foemen bit the dust.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>Seven captains at our seven gates</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thundered; for each a champion waits,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Each left behind his armour bright,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Trophy for Zeus who turns the fight;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Save two alone, that ill-starred pair</span>
									<br/>
									<span>One mother to one father bare,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who lance in rest, one ’gainst the other</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Drave, and both perished, brother slain by brother.</span>
								</p>
							</div>
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Antistrophe 2</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>Now Victory to Thebes returns again</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And smiles upon her chariot-circled plain.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Now let feast and festal shout</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Memories of war blot out.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Let us to the temples throng,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Dance and sing the live night long.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">God of Thebes, lead thou the round,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Bacchus, shaker of the ground!</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Let us end our revels here;</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Lo! Creon our new lord draws near,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Crowned by this strange chance, our king.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">What, I marvel, pondering?</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Why this summons? Wherefore call</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Us, his elders, one and all,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Bidding us with him debate,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">On some grave concern of State?</span>
								</p>
							</div>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Elders, the gods have righted once again</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Our storm-tossed ship of state, now safe in port.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But you by special summons I convened</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As my most trusted councillors; first, because</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I knew you loyal to Laius of old;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Again, when Oedipus restored our State,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Both while he ruled and when his rule was o’er,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ye still were constant to the royal line.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now that his two sons perished in one day,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Brother by brother murderously slain,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By right of kinship to the Princes dead,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I claim and hold the throne and sovereignty.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yet ’tis no easy matter to discern</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The temper of a man, his mind and will,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Till he be proved by exercise of power;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And in my case, if one who reigns supreme</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Swerve from the highest policy, tongue-tied</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By fear of consequence, that man I hold,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And ever held, the basest of the base.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And I contemn the man who sets his friend</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Before his country. For myself, I call</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To witness Zeus, whose eyes are everywhere,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If I perceive some mischievous design</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To sap the State, I will not hold my tongue;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor would I reckon as my private friend</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A public foe, well knowing that the State</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is the good ship that holds our fortunes all:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Farewell to friendship, if she suffers wreck.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Such is the policy by which I seek</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To serve the Commons and conformably</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I have proclaimed an edict as concerns</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The sons of Oedipus; Eteocles</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who in his country’s battle fought and fell,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The foremost champion⁠—duly bury him</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With all observances and ceremonies</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That are the guerdon of the heroic dead.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But for the miscreant exile who returned</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Minded in flames and ashes to blot out</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His father’s city and his father’s gods,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And glut his vengeance with his kinsmen’s blood.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or drag them captive at his chariot wheels⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For Polyneices ’tis ordained that none</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shall give him burial or make mourn for him,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But leave his corpse unburied, to be meat</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For dogs and carrion crows, a ghastly sight.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So am I purposed; never by my will</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shall miscreants take precedence of true men,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But all good patriots, alive or dead,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shall be by me preferred and honourèd.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Son of Menoeceus, thus thou will’st to deal</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With him who loathed and him who loved our State.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy word is law; thou canst dispose of us</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The living, as thou will’st, as of the dead.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>See then ye execute what I ordain.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>On younger shoulders lay this grievous charge.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Fear not, I’ve posted guards to watch the corpse.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What further duty would’st thou lay on us?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Not to connive at disobedience.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>No man is mad enough to court his death.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The penalty <em>is</em> death: yet hope of gain</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hath lured men to their ruin oftentimes.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Guard</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Guard</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>My lord, I will not make pretence to pant</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And puff as some light-footed messenger.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In sooth my soul beneath its pack of thought</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Made many a halt and turned and turned again;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For conscience plied her spur and curb by turns.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>“Why hurry headlong to thy fate, poor fool?”</span>
								<br/>
								<span>She whispered. Then again, “If Creon learn</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This from another, thou wilt rue it worse.”</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thus leisurely I hastened on my road;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Much thought extends a furlong to a league.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But in the end the forward voice prevailed,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To face thee. I will speak though I say nothing.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For plucking courage from despair methought,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>“Let the worst hap, thou canst but meet thy fate.”</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What is thy news? Why this despondency?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Guard</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Let me premise a word about myself.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I neither did the deed nor saw it done,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor were it just that I should come to harm.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou art good at parry, and canst fence about</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Some matter of grave import, as is plain.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Guard</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The bearer of dread tidings needs must quake.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Then, sirrah, shoot thy bolt and get thee gone.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Guard</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Well, it must out; the corpse is buried; someone</span>
								<br/>
								<span>E’en now besprinkled it with thirsty dust,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Performed the proper ritual⁠—and was gone.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What say’st thou? Who hath dared to do this thing?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Guard</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I cannot tell, for there was ne’er a trace</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of pick or mattock⁠—hard unbroken ground,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Without a scratch or rut of chariot wheels,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No sign that human hands had been at work.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When the first sentry of the morning watch</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Gave the alarm, we all were terror-stricken.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The corpse had vanished, not interred in earth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But strewn with dust, as if by one who sought</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To avert the curse that haunts the unburied dead:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of hound or ravening jackal, not a sign.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thereat arose an angry war of words;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Guard railed at guard and blows were like to end it,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For none was there to part us, each in turn</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Suspected, but the guilt brought home to none,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From lack of evidence. We challenged each</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The ordeal, or to handle red-hot iron,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or pass through fire, affirming on our oath</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Our innocence⁠—we neither did the deed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ourselves, nor know who did or compassed it.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Our quest was at a standstill, when one spake</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And bowed us all to earth like quivering reeds,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For there was no gainsaying him nor way</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To escape perdition: <em>Ye are bound to tell</em></span>
								<br/>
								<span><em>The King, ye cannot hide it</em>; so he spake.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And he convinced us all; so lots were cast,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And I, unlucky scapegoat, drew the prize.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So here I am unwilling and withal</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unwelcome; no man cares to hear ill news.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I had misgivings from the first, my liege,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of something more than natural at work.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O cease, you vex me with your babblement;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I am like to think you dote in your old age.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is it not arrant folly to pretend</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That gods would have a thought for this dead man?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Did they forsooth award him special grace,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And as some benefactor bury him,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who came to fire their hallowed sanctuaries,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To sack their shrines, to desolate their land,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And scout their ordinances? Or perchance</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The gods bestow their favours on the bad.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No! no! I long have noted malcontents,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who wagged their heads, and kicked against the yoke,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Misliking these my orders, and my rule.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>’Tis they, I warrant, who suborned my guards</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By bribes. Of evils current upon earth</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The worst is money. Money ’tis that sacks</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Cities, and drives men forth from hearth and home;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Warps and seduces native innocence,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And breeds a habit of dishonesty.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But they who sold themselves shall find their greed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Out-shot the mark, and rue it soon or late.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yea, as I still revere the dread of Zeus,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By Zeus I swear, except ye find and bring</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Before my presence here the very man</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who carried out this lawless burial,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Death for your punishment shall not suffice.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hanged on a cross, alive ye first shall make</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Confession of this outrage. This will teach you</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What practices are like to serve your turn.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There are some villainies that bring no gain,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For by dishonesty the few may thrive,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The many come to ruin and disgrace.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Guard</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>May I not speak, or must I turn and go</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Without a word?⁠—</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Begone! canst thou not see</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That e’en this question irks me?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Guard</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Where, my lord?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is it thy ears that suffer, or thy heart?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Why seek to probe and find the seat of pain?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Guard</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I gall thine ears⁠—this miscreant thy mind.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What an inveterate babbler! get thee gone!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Guard</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Babbler perchance, but innocent of the crime.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Twice guilty, having sold thy soul for gain.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Guard</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Alas! how sad when reasoners reason wrong.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Go, quibble with thy reason. If thou fail’st</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To find these malefactors, thou shalt own</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The wages of ill-gotten gains is death. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</b>.</i></span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Guard</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I pray he may be found. But caught or not</span>
								<br/>
								<span>(And fortune must determine that) thou never</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shalt see me here returning; that is sure.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For past all hope or thought I have escaped,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And for my safety owe the gods much thanks.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Strophe 1</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>Many wonders there be, but naught more wondrous than man:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Over the surging sea, with a whitening south wind wan,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Through the foam of the firth, man makes his perilous way;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And the eldest of deities Earth that knows not toil nor decay</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ever he furrows and scores, as his team, year in year out,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With breed of the yokèd horse, the ploughshare turneth about.</span>
								</p>
							</div>
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Antistrophe 1</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>The light-witted birds of the air, the beasts of the weald and the wood</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He traps with his woven snare, and the brood of the briny flood.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Master of cunning he: the savage bull, and the hart</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who roams the mountain free, are tamed by his infinite art;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And the shaggy rough-maned steed is broken to bear the bit.</span>
								</p>
							</div>
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Strophe 2</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>Speech and the wind-swift speed of counsel and civic wit,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He hath learnt for himself all these; and the arrowy rain to fly</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And the nipping airs that freeze, ’neath the open winter sky.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He hath provision for all: fell plague he hath learnt to endure;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Safe whate’er may befall: yet for death he hath found no cure.</span>
								</p>
							</div>
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Antistrophe 2</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>Passing the wildest flight thought are the cunning and skill,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That guide man now to the light, but now to counsels of ill.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If he honours the laws of the land, and reveres the Gods of the State</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Proudly his city shall stand; but a cityless outcast I rate</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whoso bold in his pride from the path of right doth depart;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ne’er may I sit by his side, or share the thoughts of his heart.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">What strange vision meets my eyes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Fills me with a wild surprise?</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Sure I know her, sure ’tis she,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">The maid Antigone.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Hapless child of hapless sire,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Didst thou recklessly conspire,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Madly brave the King’s decree?</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Therefore are they haling thee?</span>
								</p>
							</div>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Guard</b> bringing <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Antigone</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Guard</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Here is the culprit taken in the act</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of giving burial. But where’s the King?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>There from the palace he returns in time.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Why is my presence timely? What has chanced?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Guard</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>No man, my lord, should make a vow, for if</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He ever swears he will not do a thing,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His afterthoughts belie his first resolve.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When from the hail-storm of thy threats I fled</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I sware thou wouldst not see me here again;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But the wild rapture of a glad surprise</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Intoxicates, and so I’m here forsworn.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And here’s my prisoner, caught in the very act,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Decking the grave. No lottery this time;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This prize is mine by right of treasure-trove.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So take her, judge her, rack her, if thou wilt.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>She’s thine, my liege; but I may rightly claim</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hence to depart well quit of all these ills.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Say, how didst thou arrest the maid, and where?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Guard</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Burying the man. There’s nothing more to tell.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Hast thou thy wits? Or know’st thou what thou say’st?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Guard</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I saw this woman burying the corpse</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Against thy orders. Is that clear and plain?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>But how was she surprised and caught in the act?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Guard</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>It happened thus. No sooner had we come,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Driven from thy presence by those awful threats,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Than straight we swept away all trace of dust,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And bared the clammy body. Then we sat</span>
								<br/>
								<span>High on the ridge to windward of the stench,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>While each man kept he fellow alert and rated</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Roundly the sluggard if he chanced to nap.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So all night long we watched, until the sun</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Stood high in heaven, and his blazing beams</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Smote us. A sudden whirlwind then upraised</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A cloud of dust that blotted out the sky,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And swept the plain, and stripped the woodlands bare,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And shook the firmament. We closed our eyes</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And waited till the heaven-sent plague should pass.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>At last it ceased, and lo! there stood this maid.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A piercing cry she uttered, sad and shrill,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As when the mother bird beholds her nest</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Robbed of its nestlings; even so the maid</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wailed as she saw the body stripped and bare,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And cursed the ruffians who had done this deed.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Anon she gathered handfuls of dry dust,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Then, holding high a well-wrought brazen urn,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thrice on the dead she poured a lustral stream.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We at the sight swooped down on her and seized</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Our quarry. Undismayed she stood, and when</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We taxed her with the former crime and this,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>She disowned nothing. I was glad⁠—and grieved;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For ’tis most sweet to ’scape oneself scot-free,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And yet to bring disaster to a friend</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is grievous. Take it all in all, I deem</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A man’s first duty is to serve himself.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Speak, girl, with head bent low and downcast eyes,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Does thou plead guilty or deny the deed?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antigone</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Guilty. I did it, I deny it not.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td>
							<p>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Guard</b>.</i>
							</p>
							<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Sirrah, begone whither thou wilt, and thank</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy luck that thou hast ’scaped a heavy charge.</span>
								</p>
							</div>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Antigone</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Now answer this plain question, yes or no,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wast thou acquainted with the interdict?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antigone</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I knew, all knew; how should I fail to know?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And yet wert bold enough to break the law?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antigone</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yea, for these laws were not ordained of Zeus,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And she who sits enthroned with gods below,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Justice, enacted not these human laws.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor did I deem that thou, a mortal man,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Could’st by a breath annul and override</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The immutable unwritten laws of Heaven.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>They were not born today nor yesterday;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>They die not; and none knoweth whence they sprang.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I was not like, who feared no mortal’s frown,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To disobey these laws and so provoke</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The wrath of Heaven. I knew that I must die,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>E’en hadst thou not proclaimed it; and if death</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is thereby hastened, I shall count it gain.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For death is gain to him whose life, like mine,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is full of misery. Thus my lot appears</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Not sad, but blissful; for had I endured</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To leave my mother’s son unburied there,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I should have grieved with reason, but not now.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And if in this thou judgest me a fool,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Methinks the judge of folly’s not acquit.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>A stubborn daughter of a stubborn sire,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This ill-starred maiden kicks against the pricks.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Well, let her know the stubbornest of wills</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are soonest bended, as the hardest iron,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O’er-heated in the fire to brittleness,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Flies soonest into fragments, shivered through.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A snaffle curbs the fieriest steed, and he</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who in subjection lives must needs be meek.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But this proud girl, in insolence well-schooled,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>First overstepped the established law, and then⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A second and worse act of insolence⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>She boasts and glories in her wickedness.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now if she thus can flout authority</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unpunished, I am woman, she the man.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But though she be my sister’s child or nearer</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of kin than all who worship at my hearth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor she nor yet her sister shall escape</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The utmost penalty, for both I hold,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As arch-conspirators, of equal guilt.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Bring forth the older; even now I saw her</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Within the palace, frenzied and distraught.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The workings of the mind discover oft</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Dark deeds in darkness schemed, before the act.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>More hateful still the miscreant who seeks</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When caught, to make a virtue of a crime.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antigone</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Would’st thou do more than slay thy prisoner?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Not I, thy life is mine, and that’s enough.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antigone</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Why dally then? To me no word of thine</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is pleasant: God forbid it e’er should please;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Nor am I more acceptable to thee.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And yet how otherwise had I achieved</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A name so glorious as by burying</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A brother? so my townsmen all would say,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where they not gagged by terror. Manifold</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A king’s prerogatives, and not the least</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That all his acts and all his words are law.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Of all these Thebans none so deems but thou.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antigone</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>These think as I, but bate their breath to thee.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Hast thou no shame to differ from all these?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antigone</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>To reverence kith and kin can bring no shame.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Was his dead foeman not thy kinsman too?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antigone</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>One mother bare them and the self-same sire.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Why cast a slur on one by honouring one?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antigone</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The dead man will not bear thee out in this.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Surely, if good and evil fare alike.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antigone</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The slain man was no villain but a brother.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The patriot perished by the outlaw’s brand.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antigone</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Nathless the realms below these rites require.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Not that the base should fare as do the brave.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antigone</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Who knows if this world’s crimes are virtues there?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Not even death can make a foe a friend.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antigone</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>My nature is for mutual love, not hate.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Die then, and love the dead if thou must,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No woman shall be the master while I live.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Ismene</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span class="i4">Lo from out the palace gate,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Weeping o’er her sister’s fate,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Comes Ismene; see her brow,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Once serene, beclouded now,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">See her beauteous face o’erspread</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">With a flush of angry red.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Woman, who like a viper unperceived</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Didst harbour in my house and drain my blood,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Two plagues I nurtured blindly, so it proves,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To sap my throne. Say, didst thou too abet</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This crime, or dost abjure all privity?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ismene</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I did the deed, if she will have it so,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And with my sister claim to share the guilt.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antigone</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>That were unjust. Thou would’st not act with me</span>
								<br/>
								<span>At first, and I refused thy partnership.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ismene</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>But now thy bark is stranded, I am bold</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To claim my share as partner in the loss.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antigone</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Who did the deed the under-world knows well:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A friend in word is never friend of mine.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ismene</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O sister, scorn me not, let me but share</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy work of piety, and with thee die.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antigone</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Claim not a work in which thou hadst no hand;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>One death sufficeth. Wherefore should’st thou die?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ismene</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What would life profit me bereft of thee?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antigone</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ask Creon, he’s thy kinsman and best friend.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ismene</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Why taunt me? Find’st thou pleasure in these gibes?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antigone</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>’Tis a sad mockery, if indeed I mock.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ismene</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O say if I can help thee even now.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antigone</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>No, save thyself; I grudge not thy escape.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ismene</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Is e’en this boon denied, to share thy lot?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antigone</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yea, for thou chosed’st life, and I to die.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ismene</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou canst not say that I did not protest.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antigone</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Well, some approved thy wisdom, others mine.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ismene</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>But now we stand convicted, both alike.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antigone</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Fear not; thou livest, I died long ago,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Then when I gave my life to save the dead.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Both maids, methinks, are crazed. One suddenly</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Has lost her wits, the other was born mad.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ismene</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yea, so it falls, sire, when misfortune comes,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The wisest even lose their mother wit.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I’ faith thy wit forsook thee when thou mad’st</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy choice with evil-doers to do ill.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ismene</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What, life for me without my sister here?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Say not thy sister <em>here</em>: thy sister’s dead.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ismene</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What wilt thou slay thy own son’s plighted bride?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Aye, let him raise him seed from other fields.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Ismene</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>No new espousal can be like the old.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>A plague on trulls who court and woo our sons.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antigone</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O Haemon, how thy sire dishonours thee!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>A plague on thee and thy accursed bride!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What, wilt thou rob thine own son of his bride?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>’Tis death that bars this marriage, not his sire.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>So her death-warrant, it would seem, is sealed.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>By you, as first by me; off with them, guards,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And keep them close. Henceforward let them learn</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To live as women use, not roam at large.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For e’en the bravest spirits run away</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When they perceive death pressing on life’s heels.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Strophe 1</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>Thrice blest are they who never tasted pain!</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">If once the curse of Heaven attaint a race,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">The infection lingers on and speeds apace,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Age after age, and each the cup must drain.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>So when Etesian blasts from Thrace downpour</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Sweep o’er the blackening main and whirl to land</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">From Ocean’s cavernous depths his ooze and sand,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Billow on billow thunders on the shore.</span>
								</p>
							</div>
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Antistrophe 1</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>On the Labdacidae I see descending</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Woe upon woe; from days of old some god</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Laid on the race a malison, and his rod</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Scourges each age with sorrows never ending.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>The light that dawned upon its last born son</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Is vanished, and the bloody axe of Fate</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Has felled the goodly tree that blossomed late.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O Oedipus, by reckless pride undone!</span>
								</p>
							</div>
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Strophe 2</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>Thy might, O Zeus, what mortal power can quell?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not sleep that lays all else beneath its spell,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor moons that never tire: untouched by Time,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i5">Throned in the dazzling light</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i5">That crowns Olympus’ height,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou reignest King, omnipotent, sublime.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span class="i6">Past, present, and to be,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i6">All bow to thy decree,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i6">All that exceeds the mean by Fate</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i6">Is punished, Love or Hate.</span>
								</p>
							</div>
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Antistrophe 2</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>Hope flits about never-wearying wings;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Profit to some, to some light loves she brings,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But no man knoweth how her gifts may turn,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Till ’neath his feet the treacherous ashes burn.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sure ’twas a sage inspired that spake this word;</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i6">
										<em>If evil good appear</em>
									</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i6">
										<em>To any, Fate is near;</em>
									</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And brief the respite from her flaming sword.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span class="i6">Hither comes in angry mood</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i6">Haemon, latest of thy brood;</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i6">Is it for his bride he’s grieved,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i6">Or her marriage-bed deceived,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i6">Doth he make his mourn for thee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i6">Maid forlorn, Antigone?</span>
								</p>
							</div>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Haemon</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Soon shall we know, better than seer can tell.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Learning may fixed decree anent thy bride,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou mean’st not, son, to rave against thy sire?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Know’st not whate’er we do is done in love?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Haemon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O father, I am thine, and I will take</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy wisdom as the helm to steer withal.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Therefore no wedlock shall by me be held</span>
								<br/>
								<span>More precious than thy loving goverance.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Well spoken: so right-minded sons should feel,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In all deferring to a father’s will.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For ’tis the hope of parents they may rear</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A brood of sons submissive, keen to avenge</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Their father’s wrongs, and count his friends their own.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But who begets unprofitable sons,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He verily breeds trouble for himself,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And for his foes much laughter. Son, be warned</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And let no woman fool away thy wits.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ill fares the husband mated with a shrew,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And her embraces very soon wax cold.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For what can wound so surely to the quick</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As a false friend? So spue and cast her off,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Bid her go find a husband with the dead.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For since I caught her openly rebelling,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of all my subjects the one malcontent,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I will not prove a traitor to the State.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>She surely dies. Go, let her, if she will,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Appeal to Zeus the God of Kindred, for</span>
								<br/>
								<span>If thus I nurse rebellion in my house,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shall not I foster mutiny without?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For whoso rules his household worthily,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Will prove in civic matters no less wise.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But he who overbears the laws, or thinks</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To overrule his rulers, such an one</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I never will allow. Whome’er the State</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Appoints must be obeyed in everything,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But small and great, just and unjust alike.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I warrant such a one in either case</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Would shine, as King or subject; such a man</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Would in the storm of battle stand his ground,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A comrade leal and true; but Anarchy⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What evils are not wrought by Anarchy!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>She ruins States, and overthrows the home,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>She dissipates and routs the embattled host;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>While discipline preserves the ordered ranks.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Therefore we must maintain authority</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And yield to tittle to a woman’s will.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Better, if needs be, men should cast us out</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Than hear it said, a woman proved his match.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>To me, unless old age have dulled my wits,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy words appear both reasonable and wise.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Haemon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Father, the gods implant in mortal men</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Reason, the choicest gift bestowed by heaven.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>’Tis not for me to say thou errest, nor</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Would I arraign thy wisdom, if I could;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And yet wise thoughts may come to other men</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And, as thy son, it falls to me to mark</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The acts, the words, the comments of the crowd.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The commons stand in terror of thy frown,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And dare not utter aught that might offend,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But I can overhear their muttered plaints,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Know how the people mourn this maiden doomed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For noblest deeds to die the worst of deaths.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When her own brother slain in battle lay</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unsepulchred, she suffered not his corse</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To lie for carrion birds and dogs to maul:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Should not her name (they cry) be writ in gold?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Such the low murmurings that reach my ear.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O father, nothing is by me more prized</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Than thy well-being, for what higher good</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Can children covet than their sire’s fair fame,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As fathers too take pride in glorious sons?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Therefore, my father, cling not to one mood,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And deem not thou art right, all others wrong.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For whoso thinks that wisdom dwells with him,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That he alone can speak or think aright,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Such oracles are empty breath when tried.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The wisest man will let himself be swayed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By others’ wisdom and relax in time.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>See how the trees beside a stream in flood</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Save, if they yield to force, each spray unharmed,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But by resisting perish root and branch.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The mariner who keeps his mainsheet taut,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And will not slacken in the gale, is like</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To sail with thwarts reversed, keel uppermost.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Relent then and repent thee of thy wrath;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For, if one young in years may claim some sense,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I’ll say ’tis best of all to be endowed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With absolute wisdom; but, if that’s denied,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>(And nature takes not readily that ply)</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Next wise is he who lists to sage advice.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>If he says aught in season, heed him, King.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Haemon</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Heed thou thy sire too; both have spoken well.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What, would you have us at our age be schooled,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lessoned in prudence by a beardless boy?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Haemon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I plead for justice, father, nothing more.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Weigh me upon my merit, not my years.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Strange merit this to sanction lawlessness!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Haemon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>For evil-doers I would urge no plea.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Is not this maid an arrant law-breaker?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Haemon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The Theban commons with one voice say, No.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What, shall the mob dictate my policy?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Haemon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>’Tis thou, methinks, who speakest like a boy.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Am I to rule for others, or myself?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Haemon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>A State for one man is no State at all.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The State is his who rules it, so ’tis held.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Haemon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>As monarch of a desert thou wouldst shine.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>This boy, methinks, maintains the woman’s cause.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Haemon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>If thou be’st woman, yes. My thought’s for thee.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O reprobate, would’st wrangle with thy sire?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Haemon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Because I see thee wrongfully perverse.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And am I wrong, if I maintain my rights?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Haemon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Talk not of rights; thou spurn’st the due of Heaven.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O heart corrupt, a woman’s minion thou!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Haemon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Slave to dishonour thou wilt never find me.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thy speech at least was all a plea for her.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Haemon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And thee and me, and for the gods below.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Living the maid shall never be thy bride.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Haemon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>So she shall die, but one will die with her.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Hast come to such a pass as threaten me?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Haemon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What threat is this, vain counsels to reprove?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Vain fool to instruct thy betters; thou shall rue it.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Haemon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Wert not my father, I had said thou err’st.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Play not the spaniel, thou a woman’s slave.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Haemon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>When thou dost speak, must no man make reply?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>This passes bounds. By heaven, thou shalt not rate</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And jeer and flout me with impunity.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Off with the hateful thing that she may die</span>
								<br/>
								<span>At once, beside her bridegroom, in his sight.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Haemon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Think not that in my sight the maid shall die,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or by my side; never shalt thou again</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Behold my face hereafter. Go, consort</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With friends who like a madman for their mate. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Haemon</b>.</i></span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thy son has gone, my liege, in angry haste.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Fell is the wrath of youth beneath a smart.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Let him go vent his fury like a fiend:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>These sisters twain he shall not save from death.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Surely, thou meanest not to slay them both?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I stand corrected; only her who touched</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The body.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And what death is she to die?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>She shall be taken to some desert place</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By man untrod, and in a rock-hewn cave,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With food no more than to avoid the taint</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That homicide might bring on all the State,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Buried alive. There let her call in aid</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The King of Death, the one god she reveres,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or learn too late a lesson learnt at last:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>’Tis labour lost, to reverence the dead.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Strophe</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>Love resistless in fight, all yield at a glance of thine eye,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Love who pillowed all night on a maiden’s cheek dost lie,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Over the upland folds thou roam’st, and the trackless sea.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Love the gods captive holds. Shall mortals not yield to thee?</span>
								</p>
							</div>
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Antistrophe</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>Mad are thy subjects all, and even the wisest heart</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Straight to folly will fall, at a touch of thy poisoned dart.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou didst kindle the strife, this feud of kinsman with kin,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By the eyes of a winsome wife, and the yearning her heart to win.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For as her consort still, enthroned with Justice above,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou bendest man to thy will, O all invincible Love.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span class="i5">Lo I myself am borne aside,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i5">From Justice, as I view this bride.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i5">(O sight an eye in tears to drown)</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i5">Antigone, so young, so fair,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i7">Thus hurried down</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i5">Death’s bower with the dead to share.</span>
								</p>
							</div>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antigone</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<header>
								<p>Strophe 1</p>
							</header>
							<p>
								<span>Friends, countrymen, my last farewell I make;</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i5">My journey’s done.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>One last fond, lingering, longing look I take</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i5">At the bright sun.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For Death who puts to sleep both young and old</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i5">Hales my young life,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And beckons me to Acheron’s dark fold,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i5">An unwed wife.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No youths have sung the marriage song for me,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i5">My bridal bed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No maids have strewn with flowers from the lea,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i5">’Tis Death I wed.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span class="i3">But bethink thee, thou art sped,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i3">Great and glorious, to the dead.</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i3">Thou the sword’s edge hast not tasted,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i3">No disease thy frame hath wasted.</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i3">Freely thou alone shalt go</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i3">Living to the dead below.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antigone</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<header>
								<p>Antistrophe 1</p>
							</header>
							<p>
								<span>Nay, but the piteous tale I’ve heard men tell</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">Of Tantalus’ doomed child,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Chained upon Siphylus’ high rocky fell,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">That clung like ivy wild,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Drenched by the pelting rain and whirling snow,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">Left there to pine,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>While on her frozen breast the tears aye flow⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">Her fate is mine.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span class="i3">She was sprung of gods, divine,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i3">Mortals we of mortal line.</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i3">Like renown with gods to gain</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i3">Recompenses all thy pain.</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i3">Take this solace to thy tomb</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i3">Hers in life and death thy doom.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antigone</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<header>
								<p>Strophe 2</p>
							</header>
							<p>
								<span>Alack, alack! Ye mock me. Is it meet</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">Thus to insult me living, to my face?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Cease, by our country’s altars I entreat,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">Ye lordly rulers of a lordly race.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O fount of Dirce, wood-embowered plain</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">Where Theban chariots to victory speed,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mark ye the cruel laws that now have wrought my bane,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">The friends who show no pity in my need!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Was ever fate like mine? O monstrous doom,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">Within a rock-built prison sepulchred,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To fade and wither in a living tomb,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">And alien midst the living and the dead.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<header>
								<p>Strophe 3</p>
							</header>
							<p>
								<span class="i3">In thy boldness over-rash</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i3">Madly thou thy foot didst dash</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i3">’Gainst high Justice’ altar stair.</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i3">Thou a father’s guild dost bear.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antigone</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<header>
								<p>Antistrophe 2</p>
							</header>
							<p>
								<span>At this thou touchest my most poignant pain,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">My ill-starred father’s piteous disgrace,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The taint of blood, the hereditary stain,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">That clings to all of Labdacus’ famed race.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Woe worth the monstrous marriage-bed where lay</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">A mother with the son her womb had borne;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Therein I was conceived, woe worth the day,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">Fruit of incestuous sheets, a maid forlorn,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And now I pass, accursèd and unwed,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">To meet them as an alien there below;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And thee, O brother, in marriage ill-bestead,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">’Twas thy dead hand that dealt me this death-blow.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span class="i3">Religion has her claims, ’tis true,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i3">Let rites be paid when rites are due.</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i3">Yet is it ill to disobey</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i3">The powers who hold by might the sway.</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i3">Thou hast withstood authority,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i3">A self-willed rebel, thou must die.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antigone</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>Unwept, unwed, unfriended, hence I go,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">No longer may I see the day’s bright eye;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Not one friend left to share my bitter woe,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">And o’er my ashes heave one passing sigh.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>If wail and lamentation aught availed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To stave off death, I trow they’d never end.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Away with her, and having walled her up</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In a rock-vaulted tomb, as I ordained,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Leave her alone at liberty to die,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or, if she choose, to live in solitude,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The tomb her dwelling. We in either case</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are guiltless as concerns this maiden’s blood.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Only on earth no lodging shall she find.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antigone</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O grave, O bridal bower, O prison house</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hewn from the rock, my everlasting home,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whither I go to join the mighty host</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of kinsfolk, Persephassa’s guests long dead,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The last of all, of all more miserable,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I pass, my destined span of years cut short.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And yet good hope is mine that I shall find</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A welcome from my sire, a welcome too,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From thee, my mother, and my brother dear;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>From with these hands, I laved and decked your limbs</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In death, and poured libations on your grave.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And last, my Polyneices, unto thee</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I paid due rites, and this my recompense!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Yet am I justified in wisdom’s eyes.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For even had it been some child of mine,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Or husband mouldering in death’s decay,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I had not wrought this deed despite the State.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What is the law I call in aid? ’Tis thus</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I argue. Had it been a husband dead</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I might have wed another, and have borne</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Another child, to take the dead child’s place.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But, now my sire and mother both are dead,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No second brother can be born for me.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thus by the law of conscience I was led</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To honour thee, dear brother, and was judged</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By Creon guilty of a heinous crime.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And now he drags me like a criminal,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A bride unwed, amerced of marriage-song</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And marriage-bed and joys of motherhood,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By friends deserted to a living grave.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What ordinance of heaven have I transgressed?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hereafter can I look to any god</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For succour, call on any man for help?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Alas, my piety is impious deemed.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Well, if such justice is approved of heaven,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I shall be taught by suffering my sin;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But if the sin is theirs, O may they suffer</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No worse ills than the wrongs they do to me!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>The same ungovernable will</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Drives like a gale the maiden still.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>Therefore, my guards who let her stay</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Shall smart full sore for their delay.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antigone</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>Ah, woe is me! This word I hear</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Brings death most near.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>I have no comfort. What he saith,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Portends no other thing than death.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Antigone</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>My fatherland, city of Thebes divine,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ye gods of Thebes whence sprang my line,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Look, puissant lords of Thebes, on me;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The last of all your royal house ye see.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Martyred by men of sin, undone.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Such meed my piety hath won. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Antigone</b>.</i></span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Strophe 1</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>Like to thee that maiden bright,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Danaë, in her brass-bound tower,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Once exchanged the glad sunlight</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">For a cell, her bridal bower.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And yet she sprang of royal line,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">My child, like thine,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">And nursed the seed</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">By her conceived</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of Zeus descending in a golden shower.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Strange are the ways of Fate, her power</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor wealth, nor arms withstand, nor tower;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor brass-prowed ships, that breast the sea</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">From Fate can flee.</span>
								</p>
							</div>
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Antistrophe 1</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>Thus Dryas’ child, the rash Edonian King,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For words of high disdain</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Did Bacchus to a rocky dungeon bring,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To cool the madness of a fevered brain.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">His frenzy passed,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">He learnt at last</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Twas madness gibes against a god to fling.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For once he fain had quenched the Maenad’s fire;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And of the tuneful Nine provoked the ire.</span>
								</p>
							</div>
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Strophe 2</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>By the Iron Rocks that guard the double main,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">On Bosporus’ lone strand,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where stretcheth Salmydessus’ plain</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">In the wild Thracian land,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There on his borders Ares witnessèd</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">The vengeance by a jealous step-dame ta’en</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The gore that trickled from a spindle red,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">The sightless orbits of her step-sons twain.</span>
								</p>
							</div>
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Antistrophe 2</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>Wasting away they mourned their piteous doom,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The blasted issue of their mother’s womb.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But she her lineage could trace</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">To great Erecththeus’ race;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Daughter of Boreas in her sire’s vast caves</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Reared, where the tempest raves,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Swift as his horses o’er the hills she sped;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A child of gods; yet she, my child, like thee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i6">By Destiny</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That knows not death nor age⁠—she too was vanquishèd.</span>
								</p>
							</div>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Teiresias</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Boy</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Teiresias</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Princes of Thebes, two wayfarers as one,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Having betwixt us eyes for one, we are here.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The blind man cannot move without a guide.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Why tidings, old Teiresias?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Teiresias</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I will tell thee;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And when thou hearest thou must heed the seer.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thus far I ne’er have disobeyed thy rede.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Teiresias</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>So hast thou steered the ship of State aright.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I know it, and I gladly own my debt.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Teiresias</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Bethink thee that thou treadest once again</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The razor edge of peril.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What is this?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy words inspire a dread presentiment.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Teiresias</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>The divination of my arts shall tell.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Sitting upon my throne of augury,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As is my wont, where every fowl of heaven</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Find harbourage, upon mine ears was borne</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A jargon strange of twitterings, hoots, and screams,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So knew I that each bird at the other tare</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With bloody talons, for the whirr of wings</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Could signify naught else. Perturbed in soul,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I straight essayed the sacrifice by fire</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On blazing altars, but the God of Fire</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Came not in flame, and from the thigh bones dripped</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And sputtered in the ashes a foul ooze;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Gall-bladders cracked and spurted up: the fat</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Melted and fell and left the thigh bones bare.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Such are the signs, taught by this lad, I read⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As I guide others, so the boy guides me⁠—</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The frustrate signs of oracles grown dumb.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O King, thy willful temper ails the State,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For all our shrines and altars are profaned</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By what has filled the maw of dogs and crows,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The flesh of Oedipus’ unburied son.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Therefore the angry gods abominate</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Our litanies and our burnt offerings;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Therefore no birds trill out a happy note,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Gorged with the carnival of human gore.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O ponder this, my son. To err is common</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To all men, but the man who having erred</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Hugs not his errors, but repents and seeks</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The cure, is not a wastrel nor unwise.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No fool, the saw goes, like the obstinate fool.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Let death disarm thy vengeance. O forbear</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To vex the dead. What glory wilt thou win</span>
								<br/>
								<span>By slaying twice the slain? I mean thee well;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Counsel’s most welcome if I promise gain.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Old man, ye all let fly at me your shafts</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Like anchors at a target; yea, ye set</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Your soothsayer on me. Peddlers are ye all</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And I the merchandise ye buy and sell.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Go to, and make your profit where ye will,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Silver of Sardis change for gold of Ind;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Ye will not purchase this man’s burial,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Not though the wingèd ministers of Zeus</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Should bear him in their talons to his throne;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Not e’en in awe of prodigy so dire</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Would I permit his burial, for I know</span>
								<br/>
								<span>No human soilure can assail the gods;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>This too I know, Teiresias, dire’s the fall</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of craft and cunning when it tries to gloss</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Foul treachery with fair words for filthy gain.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Teiresias</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Alas! doth any know and lay to heart⁠—</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Is this the prelude to some hackneyed saw?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Teiresias</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>How far good counsel is the best of goods?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>True, as unwisdom is the worst of ills.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Teiresias</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thou art infected with that ill thyself.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I will not bandy insults with thee, seer.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Teiresias</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And yet thou say’st my prophesies are frauds.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Prophets are all a money-getting tribe.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Teiresias</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>And kings are all a lucre-loving race.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Dost know at whom thou glancest, me thy lord?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Teiresias</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Lord of the State and saviour, thanks to me.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Skilled prophet art thou, but to wrong inclined.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Teiresias</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Take heed, thou wilt provoke me to reveal</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The mystery deep hidden in my breast.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Say on, but see it be not said for gain.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Teiresias</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Such thou, methinks, till now hast judged my words.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Be sure thou wilt not traffic on my wits.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Teiresias</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Know then for sure, the coursers of the sun</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Not many times shall run their race, before</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thou shalt have given the fruit of thine own loins</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In quittance of thy murder, life for life;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For that thou hast entombed a living soul,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And sent below a denizen of earth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And wronged the nether gods by leaving here</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A corpse unlaved, unwept, unsepulchred.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Herein thou hast no part, nor e’en the gods</span>
								<br/>
								<span>In heaven; and thou usurp’st a power not thine.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For this the avenging spirits of Heaven and Hell</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Who dog the steps of sin are on thy trail:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What these have suffered thou shalt suffer too.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And now, consider whether bought by gold</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I prophesy. For, yet a little while,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And sound of lamentation shall be heard,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of men and women through thy desolate halls;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And all thy neighbor States are leagues to avenge</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Their mangled warriors who have found a grave</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I’ the maw of wolf or hound, or wingèd bird</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That flying homewards taints their city’s air.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>These are the shafts, that like a bowman I,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Provoked to anger, loosen at thy breast,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unerring, and their smart thou shalt not shun.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Boy, lead me home, that he may vent his spleen</span>
								<br/>
								<span>On younger men, and learn to curb his tongue</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With gentler manners than his present mood. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Teiresias</b>.</i></span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>My liege, that man hath gone, foretelling woe.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And, O believe me, since these grizzled locks</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Were like the raven, never have I known</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The prophet’s warning to the State to fail.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I know it too, and it perplexes me.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To yield is grievous, but the obstinate soul</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That fights with Fate, is smitten grievously.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Son of Menoeceus, list to good advice.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What should I do. Advise me. I will heed.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Go, free the maiden from her rocky cell;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And for the unburied outlaw build a tomb.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Is that your counsel? You would have me yield?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Yea, king, this instant. Vengeance of the gods</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is swift to overtake the impenitent.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ah! what a wrench it is to sacrifice</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My heart’s resolve; but Fate is ill to fight.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Go, trust not others. Do it quick thyself.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I go hot-foot. Bestir ye one and all,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My henchmen! Get ye axes! Speed away</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To yonder eminence! I too will go,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For all my resolution this way sways.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>’Twas I that bound, I too will set her free.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Almost I am persuaded it is best</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To keep through life the law ordained of old. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</b>.</i></span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Strophe 1</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>Thou by many names adored,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Child of Zeus the God of thunder,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Of a Theban bride the wonder,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fair Italia’s guardian lord;</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>In the deep-embosomed glades</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Of the Eleusinian Queen</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Haunt of revellers, men and maids,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Dionysus, thou art seen.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>Where Ismenus rolls his waters,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Where the Dragon’s teeth were sown,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where the Bacchanals thy daughters</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Round thee roam,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">There thy home;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thebes, O Bacchus, is thine own.</span>
								</p>
							</div>
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Antistrophe 1</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>Thee on the two-crested rock</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Lurid-flaming torches see;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where Corisian maidens flock,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Thee the springs of Castaly.</span>
								</p>
								<p>
									<span>By Nysa’s bastion ivy-clad,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By shores with clustered vineyards glad,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There to thee the hymn rings out,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And through our streets we Thebans shout,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">All hall to thee</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Evoë, Evoë!</span>
								</p>
							</div>
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Strophe 2</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>Oh, as thou lov’st this city best of all,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To thee, and to thy Mother levin-stricken,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In our dire need we call;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou see’st with what a plague our townsfolk sicken.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Thy ready help we crave,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whether adown Parnassian heights descending,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or o’er the roaring straits thy swift was wending,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i6">Save us, O save!</span>
								</p>
							</div>
							<div>
								<header>
									<p>Antistrophe 2</p>
								</header>
								<p>
									<span>Brightest of all the orbs that breathe forth light,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Authentic son of Zeus, immortal king,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Leader of all the voices of the night,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Come, and thy train of Thyiads with thee bring,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Thy maddened rout</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who dance before thee all night long, and shout,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Thy handmaids we,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i4">Evoë, Evoë!</span>
								</p>
							</div>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Attend all ye who dwell beside the halls</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of Cadmus and Amphion. No man’s life</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As of one tenor would I praise or blame,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>For Fortune with a constant ebb and rise</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Casts down and raises high and low alike,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And none can read a mortal’s horoscope.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Take Creon; he, methought, if any man,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Was enviable. He had saved this land</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of Cadmus from our enemies and attained</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A monarch’s powers and ruled the state supreme,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>While a right noble issue crowned his bliss.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Now all is gone and wasted, for a life</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Without life’s joys I count a living death.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>You’ll tell me he has ample store of wealth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The pomp and circumstance of kings; but if</span>
								<br/>
								<span>These give no pleasure, all the rest I count</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The shadow of a shade, nor would I weigh</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His wealth and power ’gainst a dram of joy.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What fresh woes bring’st thou to the royal house?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Both dead, and they who live deserve to die.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Who is the slayer, who the victim? speak.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Haemon; his blood shed by no stranger hand.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What mean ye? by his father’s or his own?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>His own; in anger for his father’s crime.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O prophet, what thou spakest comes to pass.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>So stands the case; now ’tis for you to act.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Lo! from the palace gates I see approaching</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Creon’s unhappy wife, Eurydice.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Comes she by chance or learning her son’s fate?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Eurydice</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Eurydice</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Ye men of Thebes, I overheard your talk.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As I passed out to offer up my prayer</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To Pallas, and was drawing back the bar</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To open wide the door, upon my ears</span>
								<br/>
								<span>There broke a wail that told of household woe.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Stricken with terror in my handmaids’ arms</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I fell and fainted. But repeat your tale</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To one not unacquaint with misery.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Dear mistress, I was there and will relate</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The perfect truth, omitting not one word.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Why should we gloze and flatter, to be proved</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Liars hereafter? Truth is ever best.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Well, in attendance on my liege, your lord,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I crossed the plain to its utmost margin, where</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The corse of Polyneices, gnawn and mauled,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Was lying yet. We offered first a prayer</span>
								<br/>
								<span>To Pluto and the goddess of cross-ways,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With contrite hearts, to deprecate their ire.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Then laved with lustral waves the mangled corse,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Laid it on fresh-lopped branches, lit a pyre,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And to his memory piled a mighty mound</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of mother earth. Then to the caverned rock,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The bridal chamber of the maid and Death,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We sped, about to enter. But a guard</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Heard from that godless shrine a far shrill wail,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And ran back to our lord to tell the news.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But as he nearer drew a hollow sound</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of lamentation to the King was borne.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He groaned and uttered then this bitter plaint:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>“Am I a prophet? miserable me!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is this the saddest path I ever trod?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>’Tis my son’s voice that calls me. On press on,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My henchmen, haste with double speed to the tomb</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Where rocks down-torn have made a gap, look in</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And tell me if in truth I recognise</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The voice of Haemon or am heaven-deceived.”</span>
								<br/>
								<span>So at the bidding of our distraught lord</span>
								<br/>
								<span>We looked, and in the craven’s vaulted gloom</span>
								<br/>
								<span>I saw the maiden lying strangled there,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A noose of linen twined about her neck;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And hard beside her, clasping her cold form,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Her lover lay bewailing his dead bride</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Death-wedded, and his father’s cruelty.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>When the King saw him, with a terrible groan</span>
								<br/>
								<span>He moved towards him, crying, “O my son</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What hast thou done? What ailed thee? What mischance</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Has reft thee of thy reason? O come forth,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Come forth, my son; thy father supplicates.”</span>
								<br/>
								<span>But the son glared at him with tiger eyes,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Spat in his face, and then, without a word,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Drew his two-hilted sword and smote, but missed</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His father flying backwards. Then the boy,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Wroth with himself, poor wretch, incontinent</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Fell on his sword and drove it through his side</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Home, but yet breathing clasped in his lax arms</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The maid, her pallid cheek incarnadined</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With his expiring gasps. So there they lay</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Two corpses, one in death. His marriage rites</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Are consummated in the halls of Death:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A witness that of ills whate’er befall</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Mortals’ unwisdom is the worst of all. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Eurydice</b>.</i></span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What makest thou of this? The Queen has gone</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Without a word importing good or ill.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I marvel too, but entertain good hope.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>’Tis that she shrinks in public to lament</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Her son’s sad ending, and in privacy</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Would with her maidens mourn a private loss.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Trust me, she is discreet and will not err.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I know not, but strained silence, so I deem,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Is no less ominous than excessive grief.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Well, let us to the house and solve our doubts,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whether the tumult of her heart conceals</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Some fell design. It may be thou art right:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unnatural silence signifies no good.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span class="i4">Lo! the King himself appears.</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Evidence he with him bears</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">’Gainst himself (ah me! I quake</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">’Gainst a king such charge to make)</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">But all must own,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">The guilt is his and his alone.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<header>
								<p>Strophe 1</p>
							</header>
							<p>
								<span class="i4">Woe for sin of minds perverse,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Deadly fraught with mortal curse.</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Behold us slain and slayers, all akin.</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Woe for my counsel dire, conceived in sin.</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i6">Alas, my son,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i6">Life scarce begun,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i6">Thou wast undone.</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">The fault was mine, mine only, O my son!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span>Too late thou seemest to perceive the truth.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<header>
								<p>Strophe 2</p>
							</header>
							<p>
								<span>By sorrow schooled. Heavy the hand of God,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thorny and rough the paths my feet have trod,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Humbled my pride, my pleasure turned to pain;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Poor mortals, how we labour all in vain!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Messenger</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Sorrows are thine, my lord, and more to come,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>One lying at thy feet, another yet</span>
								<br/>
								<span>More grievous waits thee, when thou comest home.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>What woe is lacking to my tale of woes?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Thy wife, the mother of thy dead son here,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Lies stricken by a fresh inflicted blow.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<header>
								<p>Antistrophe 1</p>
							</header>
							<p>
								<span class="i2">How bottomless the pit!</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Does claim me too, O Death?</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">What is this word he saith,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">This woeful messenger? Say, is it fit</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">To slay anew a man already slain?</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Is Death at work again,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i2">Stroke upon stroke, first son, then mother slain?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Look for thyself. She lies for all to view.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<header>
								<p>Antistrophe 2</p>
							</header>
							<p>
								<span>Alas! another added woe I see.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>What more remains to crown my agony?</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A minute past I clasped a lifeless son,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And now another victim Death hath won.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unhappy mother, most unhappy son!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Beside the altar on a keen-edged sword</span>
								<br/>
								<span>She fell and closed her eyes in night, but erst</span>
								<br/>
								<span>She mourned for Megareus who nobly died</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Long since, then for her son; with her last breath</span>
								<br/>
								<span>She cursèd thee, the slayer of her child.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<header>
								<p>Strophe 3</p>
							</header>
							<p>
								<span class="i4">I shudder with affright</span>
								<br/>
								<span>O for a two-edged sword to slay outright</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">A wretch like me,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Made one with misery.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>’Tis true that thou wert charged by the dead Queen</span>
								<br/>
								<span>As author of both deaths, hers and her son’s.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>In what wise was her self-destruction wrought?</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Messenger</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Hearing the loud lament above her son</span>
								<br/>
								<span>With her own hand she stabbed herself to the heart.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<header>
								<p>Strophe 4</p>
							</header>
							<p>
								<span>I am the guilty cause. I did the deed,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Thy murderer. Yea, I guilty plead.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>My henchmen, lead me hence, away, away,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>A cipher, less than nothing; no delay!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>Well said, if in disaster aught is well:</span>
								<br/>
								<span>His past endure demand the speediest cure.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<header>
								<p>Antistrophe 3</p>
							</header>
							<p>
								<span class="i4">Come, Fate, a friend at need,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Come with all speed!</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Come, my best friend,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">And speed my end!</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Away, away!</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Let me not look upon another day!</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>This for the morrow; to us are present needs</span>
								<br/>
								<span>That they whom it concerns must take in hand.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>I join your prayer that echoes my desire.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
							<p>
								<span>O pray not, prayers are idle; from the doom</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Of fate for mortals refuge is there none.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Creon</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<header>
								<p>Antistrophe 4</p>
							</header>
							<p>
								<span>Away with me, a worthless wretch who slew</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Unwitting thee, my son, thy mother too.</span>
								<br/>
								<span>Whither to turn I know not; every way</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Leads but astray,</span>
								<br/>
								<span>And on my head I feel the heavy weight</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Of crushing Fate.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Chorus</td>
						<td epub:type="z3998:song">
							<p>
								<span class="i4">Of happiness the chiefest part</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i6">Is a wise heart:</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">And to defraud the gods in aught</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i6">With peril’s fraught.</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Swelling words of high-flown might</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Mightily the gods do smite.</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Chastisement for errors past</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i4">Wisdom brings to age at last.</span>
							</p>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
