<h2>ANTIGONE</h2>
<p class="noindent">
             ANTIGONE and ISMENE before the Palace gates.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ANTIGONE.<br/>
Ismene, sister of my blood and heart,<br/>
See’st thou how Zeus would in our lives fulfill<br/>
The weird of Oedipus, a world of woes!<br/>
For what of pain, affliction, outrage, shame,<br/>
Is lacking in our fortunes, thine and mine?<br/>
And now this proclamation of today<br/>
Made by our Captain-General to the State,<br/>
What can its purport be? Didst hear and heed,<br/>
Or art thou deaf when friends are banned as foes?<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ISMENE.<br/>
To me, Antigone, no word of friends<br/>
Has come, or glad or grievous, since we twain<br/>
Were reft of our two brethren in one day<br/>
By double fratricide; and since i’ the night<br/>
Our Argive leaguers fled, no later news<br/>
Has reached me, to inspirit or deject.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ANTIGONE.<br/>
I know ’twas so, and therefore summoned thee<br/>
Beyond the gates to breathe it in thine ear.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ISMENE.<br/>
What is it? Some dark secret stirs thy breast.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ANTIGONE.<br/>
What but the thought of our two brothers dead,<br/>
The one by Creon graced with funeral rites,<br/>
The other disappointed? Eteocles<br/>
He hath consigned to earth (as fame reports)<br/>
With obsequies that use and wont ordain,<br/>
So gracing him among the dead below.<br/>
But Polyneices, a dishonored corse,<br/>
(So by report the royal edict runs)<br/>
No man may bury him or make lament—<br/>
Must leave him tombless and unwept, a feast<br/>
For kites to scent afar and swoop upon.<br/>
Such is the edict (if report speak true)<br/>
Of Creon, our most noble Creon, aimed<br/>
At thee and me, aye me too; and anon<br/>
He will be here to promulgate, for such<br/>
As have not heard, his mandate; ’tis in sooth<br/>
No passing humor, for the edict says<br/>
Whoe’er transgresses shall be stoned to death.<br/>
So stands it with us; now ’tis thine to show<br/>
If thou art worthy of thy blood or base.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ISMENE.<br/>
But how, my rash, fond sister, in such case<br/>
Can I do anything to make or mar?<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ANTIGONE.<br/>
Say, wilt thou aid me and abet? Decide.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ISMENE.<br/>
In what bold venture? What is in thy thought?<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ANTIGONE.<br/>
Lend me a hand to bear the corpse away.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ISMENE.<br/>
What, bury him despite the interdict?<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ANTIGONE.<br/>
My brother, and, though thou deny him, thine<br/>
No man shall say that <i>I</i> betrayed a brother.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ISMENE.<br/>
Wilt thou persist, though Creon has forbid?<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ANTIGONE.<br/>
What right has he to keep me from my own?<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ISMENE.<br/>
Bethink thee, sister, of our father’s fate,<br/>
Abhorred, dishonored, self-convinced of sin,<br/>
Blinded, himself his executioner.<br/>
Think of his mother-wife (ill sorted names)<br/>
Done by a noose herself had twined to death<br/>
And last, our hapless brethren in one day,<br/>
Both in a mutual destiny involved,<br/>
Self-slaughtered, both the slayer and the slain.<br/>
Bethink thee, sister, we are left alone;<br/>
Shall we not perish wretchedest of all,<br/>
If in defiance of the law we cross<br/>
A monarch’s will?—weak women, think of that,<br/>
Not framed by nature to contend with men.<br/>
Remember this too that the stronger rules;<br/>
We must obey his orders, these or worse.<br/>
Therefore I plead compulsion and entreat<br/>
The dead to pardon. I perforce obey<br/>
The powers that be. ’Tis foolishness, I ween,<br/>
To overstep in aught the golden mean.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ANTIGONE.<br/>
I urge no more; nay, wert thou willing still,<br/>
I would not welcome such a fellowship.<br/>
Go thine own way; myself will bury him.<br/>
How sweet to die in such employ, to rest,—<br/>
Sister and brother linked in love’s embrace—<br/>
A sinless sinner, banned awhile on earth,<br/>
But by the dead commended; and with them<br/>
I shall abide for ever. As for thee,<br/>
Scorn, if thou wilt, the eternal laws of Heaven.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ISMENE.<br/>
I scorn them not, but to defy the State<br/>
Or break her ordinance I have no skill.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ANTIGONE.<br/>
A specious pretext. I will go alone<br/>
To lap my dearest brother in the grave.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ISMENE.<br/>
My poor, fond sister, how I fear for thee!<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ANTIGONE.<br/>
O waste no fears on me; look to thyself.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ISMENE.<br/>
At least let no man know of thine intent,<br/>
But keep it close and secret, as will I.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ANTIGONE.<br/>
O tell it, sister; I shall hate thee more<br/>
If thou proclaim it not to all the town.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ISMENE.<br/>
Thou hast a fiery soul for numbing work.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ANTIGONE.<br/>
I pleasure those whom I would liefest please.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ISMENE.<br/>
If thou succeed; but thou art doomed to fail.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ANTIGONE.<br/>
When strength shall fail me, yes, but not before.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ISMENE.<br/>
But, if the venture’s hopeless, why essay?<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ANTIGONE.<br/>
Sister, forbear, or I shall hate thee soon,<br/>
And the dead man will hate thee too, with cause.<br/>
Say I am mad and give my madness rein<br/>
To wreck itself; the worst that can befall<br/>
Is but to die an honorable death.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ISMENE.<br/>
Have thine own way then; ’tis a mad endeavor,<br/>
Yet to thy lovers thou art dear as ever.<br/>
[Exeunt]<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CHORUS.<br/>
(Str. 1)<br/>
Sunbeam, of all that ever dawn upon<br/>
          Our seven-gated Thebes the brightest ray,<br/>
               O eye of golden day,<br/>
How fair thy light o’er Dirce’s fountain shone,<br/>
Speeding upon their headlong homeward course,<br/>
Far quicker than they came, the Argive force;<br/>
               Putting to flight<br/>
The argent shields, the host with scutcheons white.<br/>
Against our land the proud invader came<br/>
To vindicate fell Polyneices’ claim.<br/>
          Like to an eagle swooping low,<br/>
          On pinions white as new fall’n snow.<br/>
With clanging scream, a horsetail plume his crest,<br/>
The aspiring lord of Argos onward pressed.<br/>
<br/>
(Ant. 1)<br/>
Hovering around our city walls he waits,<br/>
His spearmen raven at our seven gates.<br/>
But ere a torch our crown of towers could burn,<br/>
Ere they had tasted of our blood, they turn<br/>
Forced by the Dragon; in their rear<br/>
The din of Ares panic-struck they hear.<br/>
For Zeus who hates the braggart’s boast<br/>
Beheld that gold-bespangled host;<br/>
As at the goal the paean they upraise,<br/>
He struck them with his forked lightning blaze.<br/>
<br/>
(Str. 2)<br/>
To earthy from earth rebounding, down he crashed;<br/>
     The fire-brand from his impious hand was dashed,<br/>
As like a Bacchic reveler on he came,<br/>
Outbreathing hate and flame,<br/>
And tottered. Elsewhere in the field,<br/>
Here, there, great Area like a war-horse wheeled;<br/>
          Beneath his car down thrust<br/>
          Our foemen bit the dust.<br/>
<br/>
Seven captains at our seven gates<br/>
Thundered; for each a champion waits,<br/>
Each left behind his armor bright,<br/>
Trophy for Zeus who turns the fight;<br/>
Save two alone, that ill-starred pair<br/>
One mother to one father bare,<br/>
Who lance in rest, one ’gainst the other<br/>
Drave, and both perished, brother slain by brother.<br/>
<br/>
(Ant. 2)<br/>
Now Victory to Thebes returns again<br/>
And smiles upon her chariot-circled plain.<br/>
          Now let feast and festal should<br/>
          Memories of war blot out.<br/>
          Let us to the temples throng,<br/>
          Dance and sing the live night long.<br/>
          God of Thebes, lead thou the round.<br/>
          Bacchus, shaker of the ground!<br/>
          Let us end our revels here;<br/>
          Lo! Creon our new lord draws near,<br/>
          Crowned by this strange chance, our king.<br/>
          What, I marvel, pondering?<br/>
          Why this summons? Wherefore call<br/>
          Us, his elders, one and all,<br/>
          Bidding us with him debate,<br/>
          On some grave concern of State?<br/>
[Enter CREON]<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
Elders, the gods have righted one again<br/>
Our storm-tossed ship of state, now safe in port.<br/>
But you by special summons I convened<br/>
As my most trusted councilors; first, because<br/>
I knew you loyal to Laius of old;<br/>
Again, when Oedipus restored our State,<br/>
Both while he ruled and when his rule was o’er,<br/>
Ye still were constant to the royal line.<br/>
Now that his two sons perished in one day,<br/>
Brother by brother murderously slain,<br/>
By right of kinship to the Princes dead,<br/>
I claim and hold the throne and sovereignty.<br/>
Yet ’tis no easy matter to discern<br/>
The temper of a man, his mind and will,<br/>
Till he be proved by exercise of power;<br/>
And in my case, if one who reigns supreme<br/>
Swerve from the highest policy, tongue-tied<br/>
By fear of consequence, that man I hold,<br/>
And ever held, the basest of the base.<br/>
And I contemn the man who sets his friend<br/>
Before his country. For myself, I call<br/>
To witness Zeus, whose eyes are everywhere,<br/>
If I perceive some mischievous design<br/>
To sap the State, I will not hold my tongue;<br/>
Nor would I reckon as my private friend<br/>
A public foe, well knowing that the State<br/>
Is the good ship that holds our fortunes all:<br/>
Farewell to friendship, if she suffers wreck.<br/>
Such is the policy by which I seek<br/>
To serve the Commons and conformably<br/>
I have proclaimed an edict as concerns<br/>
The sons of Oedipus; Eteocles<br/>
Who in his country’s battle fought and fell,<br/>
The foremost champion—duly bury him<br/>
With all observances and ceremonies<br/>
That are the guerdon of the heroic dead.<br/>
But for the miscreant exile who returned<br/>
Minded in flames and ashes to blot out<br/>
His father’s city and his father’s gods,<br/>
And glut his vengeance with his kinsmen’s blood,<br/>
Or drag them captive at his chariot wheels—<br/>
For Polyneices ’tis ordained that none<br/>
Shall give him burial or make mourn for him,<br/>
But leave his corpse unburied, to be meat<br/>
For dogs and carrion crows, a ghastly sight.<br/>
So am I purposed; never by my will<br/>
Shall miscreants take precedence of true men,<br/>
But all good patriots, alive or dead,<br/>
Shall be by me preferred and honored.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CHORUS.<br/>
Son of Menoeceus, thus thou will’st to deal<br/>
With him who loathed and him who loved our State.<br/>
Thy word is law; thou canst dispose of us<br/>
The living, as thou will’st, as of the dead.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
See then ye execute what I ordain.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CHORUS.<br/>
On younger shoulders lay this grievous charge.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
Fear not, I’ve posted guards to watch the corpse.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CHORUS.<br/>
What further duty would’st thou lay on us?<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
Not to connive at disobedience.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CHORUS.<br/>
No man is mad enough to court his death.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
The penalty <i>is</i> death: yet hope of gain<br/>
Hath lured men to their ruin oftentimes.<br/>
[Enter GUARD]<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
GUARD.<br/>
My lord, I will not make pretense to pant<br/>
And puff as some light-footed messenger.<br/>
In sooth my soul beneath its pack of thought<br/>
Made many a halt and turned and turned again;<br/>
For conscience plied her spur and curb by turns.<br/>
“Why hurry headlong to thy fate, poor fool?”<br/>
She whispered. Then again, “If Creon learn<br/>
This from another, thou wilt rue it worse.”<br/>
Thus leisurely I hastened on my road;<br/>
Much thought extends a furlong to a league.<br/>
But in the end the forward voice prevailed,<br/>
To face thee. I will speak though I say nothing.<br/>
For plucking courage from despair methought,<br/>
‘Let the worst hap, thou canst but meet thy fate.’<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
What is thy news? Why this despondency?<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
GUARD.<br/>
Let me premise a word about myself?<br/>
I neither did the deed nor saw it done,<br/>
Nor were it just that I should come to harm.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
Thou art good at parry, and canst fence about<br/>
Some matter of grave import, as is plain.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
GUARD.<br/>
The bearer of dread tidings needs must quake.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
Then, sirrah, shoot thy bolt and get thee gone.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
GUARD.<br/>
Well, it must out; the corpse is buried; someone<br/>
E’en now besprinkled it with thirsty dust,<br/>
Performed the proper ritual—and was gone.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
What say’st thou? Who hath dared to do this thing?<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
GUARD.<br/>
I cannot tell, for there was ne’er a trace<br/>
Of pick or mattock—hard unbroken ground,<br/>
Without a scratch or rut of chariot wheels,<br/>
No sign that human hands had been at work.<br/>
When the first sentry of the morning watch<br/>
Gave the alarm, we all were terror-stricken.<br/>
The corpse had vanished, not interred in earth,<br/>
But strewn with dust, as if by one who sought<br/>
To avert the curse that haunts the unburied dead:<br/>
Of hound or ravening jackal, not a sign.<br/>
Thereat arose an angry war of words;<br/>
Guard railed at guard and blows were like to end it,<br/>
For none was there to part us, each in turn<br/>
Suspected, but the guilt brought home to none,<br/>
From lack of evidence. We challenged each<br/>
The ordeal, or to handle red-hot iron,<br/>
Or pass through fire, affirming on our oath<br/>
Our innocence—we neither did the deed<br/>
Ourselves, nor know who did or compassed it.<br/>
Our quest was at a standstill, when one spake<br/>
And bowed us all to earth like quivering reeds,<br/>
For there was no gainsaying him nor way<br/>
To escape perdition: <i>Ye</i>are<i>bound</i>to<i>tell</i><br/>
<i>The</i>King,<i>ye</i>cannot<i>hide</i>it; so he spake.<br/>
And he convinced us all; so lots were cast,<br/>
And I, unlucky scapegoat, drew the prize.<br/>
So here I am unwilling and withal<br/>
Unwelcome; no man cares to hear ill news.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CHORUS.<br/>
I had misgivings from the first, my liege,<br/>
Of something more than natural at work.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
O cease, you vex me with your babblement;<br/>
I am like to think you dote in your old age.<br/>
Is it not arrant folly to pretend<br/>
That gods would have a thought for this dead man?<br/>
Did they forsooth award him special grace,<br/>
And as some benefactor bury him,<br/>
Who came to fire their hallowed sanctuaries,<br/>
To sack their shrines, to desolate their land,<br/>
And scout their ordinances? Or perchance<br/>
The gods bestow their favors on the bad.<br/>
No! no! I have long noted malcontents<br/>
Who wagged their heads, and kicked against the yoke,<br/>
Misliking these my orders, and my rule.<br/>
’Tis they, I warrant, who suborned my guards<br/>
By bribes. Of evils current upon earth<br/>
The worst is money. Money ’tis that sacks<br/>
Cities, and drives men forth from hearth and home;<br/>
Warps and seduces native innocence,<br/>
And breeds a habit of dishonesty.<br/>
But they who sold themselves shall find their greed<br/>
Out-shot the mark, and rue it soon or late.<br/>
Yea, as I still revere the dread of Zeus,<br/>
By Zeus I swear, except ye find and bring<br/>
Before my presence here the very man<br/>
Who carried out this lawless burial,<br/>
Death for your punishment shall not suffice.<br/>
Hanged on a cross, alive ye first shall make<br/>
Confession of this outrage. This will teach you<br/>
What practices are like to serve your turn.<br/>
There are some villainies that bring no gain.<br/>
For by dishonesty the few may thrive,<br/>
The many come to ruin and disgrace.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
GUARD.<br/>
May I not speak, or must I turn and go<br/>
Without a word?—<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
                    Begone! canst thou not see<br/>
That e’en this question irks me?<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
GUARD.<br/>
                                   Where, my lord?<br/>
Is it thy ears that suffer, or thy heart?<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
Why seek to probe and find the seat of pain?<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
GUARD.<br/>
I gall thine ears—this miscreant thy mind.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
What an inveterate babbler! get thee gone!<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
GUARD.<br/>
Babbler perchance, but innocent of the crime.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
Twice guilty, having sold thy soul for gain.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
GUARD.<br/>
Alas! how sad when reasoners reason wrong.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
Go, quibble with thy reason. If thou fail’st<br/>
To find these malefactors, thou shalt own<br/>
The wages of ill-gotten gains is death.<br/>
[Exit CREON]<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
GUARD.<br/>
I pray he may be found. But caught or not<br/>
(And fortune must determine that) thou never<br/>
Shalt see me here returning; that is sure.<br/>
For past all hope or thought I have escaped,<br/>
And for my safety owe the gods much thanks.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CHORUS.<br/>
(Str. 1)<br/>
Many wonders there be, but naught more wondrous than man;<br/>
Over the surging sea, with a whitening south wind wan,<br/>
Through the foam of the firth, man makes his perilous way;<br/>
And the eldest of deities Earth that knows not toil nor decay<br/>
Ever he furrows and scores, as his team, year in year out,<br/>
With breed of the yoked horse, the ploughshare turneth about.<br/>
<br/>
(Ant. 1)<br/>
The light-witted birds of the air, the beasts of the weald and the wood<br/>
He traps with his woven snare, and the brood of the briny flood.<br/>
Master of cunning he: the savage bull, and the hart<br/>
Who roams the mountain free, are tamed by his infinite art;<br/>
And the shaggy rough-maned steed is broken to bear the bit.<br/>
<br/>
(Str. 2)<br/>
Speech and the wind-swift speed of counsel and civic wit,<br/>
He hath learnt for himself all these; and the arrowy rain to fly<br/>
And the nipping airs that freeze, ’neath the open winter sky.<br/>
He hath provision for all: fell plague he hath learnt to endure;<br/>
Safe whate’er may befall: yet for death he hath found no cure.<br/>
<br/>
(Ant. 2)<br/>
Passing the wildest flight thought are the cunning and skill,<br/>
That guide man now to the light, but now to counsels of ill.<br/>
If he honors the laws of the land, and reveres the Gods of the State<br/>
Proudly his city shall stand; but a cityless outcast I rate<br/>
Whoso bold in his pride from the path of right doth depart;<br/>
Ne’er may I sit by his side, or share the thoughts of his heart.<br/>
<br/>
          What strange vision meets my eyes,<br/>
          Fills me with a wild surprise?<br/>
          Sure I know her, sure ’tis she,<br/>
          The maid Antigone.<br/>
          Hapless child of hapless sire,<br/>
          Didst thou recklessly conspire,<br/>
          Madly brave the King’s decree?<br/>
          Therefore are they haling thee?<br/>
[Enter GUARD bringing ANTIGONE]<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
GUARD.<br/>
Here is the culprit taken in the act<br/>
Of giving burial. But where’s the King?<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CHORUS.<br/>
There from the palace he returns in time.<br/>
[Enter CREON]<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
Why is my presence timely? What has chanced?<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
GUARD.<br/>
No man, my lord, should make a vow, for if<br/>
He ever swears he will not do a thing,<br/>
His afterthoughts belie his first resolve.<br/>
When from the hail-storm of thy threats I fled<br/>
I sware thou wouldst not see me here again;<br/>
But the wild rapture of a glad surprise<br/>
Intoxicates, and so I’m here forsworn.<br/>
And here’s my prisoner, caught in the very act,<br/>
Decking the grave. No lottery this time;<br/>
This prize is mine by right of treasure-trove.<br/>
So take her, judge her, rack her, if thou wilt.<br/>
She’s thine, my liege; but I may rightly claim<br/>
Hence to depart well quit of all these ills.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
Say, how didst thou arrest the maid, and where?<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
GUARD.<br/>
Burying the man. There’s nothing more to tell.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
Hast thou thy wits? Or know’st thou what thou say’st?<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
GUARD.<br/>
I saw this woman burying the corpse<br/>
Against thy orders. Is that clear and plain?<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
But how was she surprised and caught in the act?<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
GUARD.<br/>
It happened thus. No sooner had we come,<br/>
Driven from thy presence by those awful threats,<br/>
Than straight we swept away all trace of dust,<br/>
And bared the clammy body. Then we sat<br/>
High on the ridge to windward of the stench,<br/>
While each man kept he fellow alert and rated<br/>
Roundly the sluggard if he chanced to nap.<br/>
So all night long we watched, until the sun<br/>
Stood high in heaven, and his blazing beams<br/>
Smote us. A sudden whirlwind then upraised<br/>
A cloud of dust that blotted out the sky,<br/>
And swept the plain, and stripped the woodlands bare,<br/>
And shook the firmament. We closed our eyes<br/>
And waited till the heaven-sent plague should pass.<br/>
At last it ceased, and lo! there stood this maid.<br/>
A piercing cry she uttered, sad and shrill,<br/>
As when the mother bird beholds her nest<br/>
Robbed of its nestlings; even so the maid<br/>
Wailed as she saw the body stripped and bare,<br/>
And cursed the ruffians who had done this deed.<br/>
Anon she gathered handfuls of dry dust,<br/>
Then, holding high a well-wrought brazen urn,<br/>
Thrice on the dead she poured a lustral stream.<br/>
We at the sight swooped down on her and seized<br/>
Our quarry. Undismayed she stood, and when<br/>
We taxed her with the former crime and this,<br/>
She disowned nothing. I was glad—and grieved;<br/>
For ’tis most sweet to ’scape oneself scot-free,<br/>
And yet to bring disaster to a friend<br/>
Is grievous. Take it all in all, I deem<br/>
A man’s first duty is to serve himself.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
Speak, girl, with head bent low and downcast eyes,<br/>
Does thou plead guilty or deny the deed?<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ANTIGONE.<br/>
Guilty. I did it, I deny it not.<br/>
<br/>
CREON (to GUARD)<br/>
Sirrah, begone whither thou wilt, and thank<br/>
Thy luck that thou hast ’scaped a heavy charge.<br/>
(To ANTIGONE)<br/>
Now answer this plain question, yes or no,<br/>
Wast thou acquainted with the interdict?<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ANTIGONE.<br/>
I knew, all knew; how should I fail to know?<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
And yet wert bold enough to break the law?<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ANTIGONE.<br/>
Yea, for these laws were not ordained of Zeus,<br/>
And she who sits enthroned with gods below,<br/>
Justice, enacted not these human laws.<br/>
Nor did I deem that thou, a mortal man,<br/>
Could’st by a breath annul and override<br/>
The immutable unwritten laws of Heaven.<br/>
They were not born today nor yesterday;<br/>
They die not; and none knoweth whence they sprang.<br/>
I was not like, who feared no mortal’s frown,<br/>
To disobey these laws and so provoke<br/>
The wrath of Heaven. I knew that I must die,<br/>
E’en hadst thou not proclaimed it; and if death<br/>
Is thereby hastened, I shall count it gain.<br/>
For death is gain to him whose life, like mine,<br/>
Is full of misery. Thus my lot appears<br/>
Not sad, but blissful; for had I endured<br/>
To leave my mother’s son unburied there,<br/>
I should have grieved with reason, but not now.<br/>
And if in this thou judgest me a fool,<br/>
Methinks the judge of folly’s not acquit.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CHORUS.<br/>
A stubborn daughter of a stubborn sire,<br/>
This ill-starred maiden kicks against the pricks.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
Well, let her know the stubbornest of wills<br/>
Are soonest bended, as the hardest iron,<br/>
O’er-heated in the fire to brittleness,<br/>
Flies soonest into fragments, shivered through.<br/>
A snaffle curbs the fieriest steed, and he<br/>
Who in subjection lives must needs be meek.<br/>
But this proud girl, in insolence well-schooled,<br/>
First overstepped the established law, and then—<br/>
A second and worse act of insolence—<br/>
She boasts and glories in her wickedness.<br/>
Now if she thus can flout authority<br/>
Unpunished, I am woman, she the man.<br/>
But though she be my sister’s child or nearer<br/>
Of kin than all who worship at my hearth,<br/>
Nor she nor yet her sister shall escape<br/>
The utmost penalty, for both I hold,<br/>
As arch-conspirators, of equal guilt.<br/>
Bring forth the older; even now I saw her<br/>
Within the palace, frenzied and distraught.<br/>
The workings of the mind discover oft<br/>
Dark deeds in darkness schemed, before the act.<br/>
More hateful still the miscreant who seeks<br/>
When caught, to make a virtue of a crime.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ANTIGONE.<br/>
Would’st thou do more than slay thy prisoner?<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
Not I, thy life is mine, and that’s enough.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ANTIGONE.<br/>
Why dally then? To me no word of thine<br/>
Is pleasant: God forbid it e’er should please;<br/>
Nor am I more acceptable to thee.<br/>
And yet how otherwise had I achieved<br/>
A name so glorious as by burying<br/>
A brother? so my townsmen all would say,<br/>
Where they not gagged by terror, Manifold<br/>
A king’s prerogatives, and not the least<br/>
That all his acts and all his words are law.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
Of all these Thebans none so deems but thou.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ANTIGONE.<br/>
These think as I, but bate their breath to thee.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
Hast thou no shame to differ from all these?<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ANTIGONE.<br/>
To reverence kith and kin can bring no shame.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
Was his dead foeman not thy kinsman too?<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ANTIGONE.<br/>
One mother bare them and the self-same sire.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
Why cast a slur on one by honoring one?<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ANTIGONE.<br/>
The dead man will not bear thee out in this.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
Surely, if good and evil fare alive.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ANTIGONE.<br/>
The slain man was no villain but a brother.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
The patriot perished by the outlaw’s brand.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ANTIGONE.<br/>
Nathless the realms below these rites require.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
Not that the base should fare as do the brave.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ANTIGONE.<br/>
Who knows if this world’s crimes are virtues there?<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
Not even death can make a foe a friend.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ANTIGONE.<br/>
My nature is for mutual love, not hate.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
Die then, and love the dead if thou must;<br/>
No woman shall be the master while I live.<br/>
[Enter ISMENE]<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CHORUS.<br/>
          Lo from out the palace gate,<br/>
          Weeping o’er her sister’s fate,<br/>
          Comes Ismene; see her brow,<br/>
          Once serene, beclouded now,<br/>
          See her beauteous face o’erspread<br/>
          With a flush of angry red.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
Woman, who like a viper unperceived<br/>
Didst harbor in my house and drain my blood,<br/>
Two plagues I nurtured blindly, so it proved,<br/>
To sap my throne. Say, didst thou too abet<br/>
This crime, or dost abjure all privity?<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ISMENE.<br/>
I did the deed, if she will have it so,<br/>
And with my sister claim to share the guilt.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ANTIGONE.<br/>
That were unjust. Thou would’st not act with me<br/>
At first, and I refused thy partnership.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ISMENE.<br/>
But now thy bark is stranded, I am bold<br/>
To claim my share as partner in the loss.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ANTIGONE.<br/>
Who did the deed the under-world knows well:<br/>
A friend in word is never friend of mine.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ISMENE.<br/>
O sister, scorn me not, let me but share<br/>
Thy work of piety, and with thee die.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ANTIGONE.<br/>
Claim not a work in which thou hadst no hand;<br/>
One death sufficeth. Wherefore should’st thou die?<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ISMENE.<br/>
What would life profit me bereft of thee?<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ANTIGONE.<br/>
Ask Creon, he’s thy kinsman and best friend.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ISMENE.<br/>
Why taunt me? Find’st thou pleasure in these gibes?<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ANTIGONE.<br/>
’Tis a sad mockery, if indeed I mock.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ISMENE.<br/>
O say if I can help thee even now.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ANTIGONE.<br/>
No, save thyself; I grudge not thy escape.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ISMENE.<br/>
Is e’en this boon denied, to share thy lot?<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ANTIGONE.<br/>
Yea, for thou chosed’st life, and I to die.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ISMENE.<br/>
Thou canst not say that I did not protest.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ANTIGONE.<br/>
Well, some approved thy wisdom, others mine.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ISMENE.<br/>
But now we stand convicted, both alike.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ANTIGONE.<br/>
Fear not; thou livest, I died long ago<br/>
Then when I gave my life to save the dead.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
Both maids, methinks, are crazed. One suddenly<br/>
Has lost her wits, the other was born mad.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ISMENE.<br/>
Yea, so it falls, sire, when misfortune comes,<br/>
The wisest even lose their mother wit.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
I’ faith thy wit forsook thee when thou mad’st<br/>
Thy choice with evil-doers to do ill.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ISMENE.<br/>
What life for me without my sister here?<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
Say not thy sister <i>here</i>: thy sister’s dead.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ISMENE.<br/>
What, wilt thou slay thy own son’s plighted bride?<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
Aye, let him raise him seed from other fields.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ISMENE.<br/>
No new espousal can be like the old.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
A plague on trulls who court and woo our sons.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ANTIGONE.<br/>
O Haemon, how thy sire dishonors thee!<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
A plague on thee and thy accursed bride!<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CHORUS.<br/>
What, wilt thou rob thine own son of his bride?<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
’Tis death that bars this marriage, not his sire.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CHORUS.<br/>
So her death-warrant, it would seem, is sealed.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
By you, as first by me; off with them, guards,<br/>
And keep them close. Henceforward let them learn<br/>
To live as women use, not roam at large.<br/>
For e’en the bravest spirits run away<br/>
When they perceive death pressing on life’s heels.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CHORUS.<br/>
(Str. 1)<br/>
Thrice blest are they who never tasted pain!<br/>
     If once the curse of Heaven attaint a race,<br/>
     The infection lingers on and speeds apace,<br/>
Age after age, and each the cup must drain.<br/>
<br/>
So when Etesian blasts from Thrace downpour<br/>
     Sweep o’er the blackening main and whirl to land<br/>
     From Ocean’s cavernous depths his ooze and sand,<br/>
Billow on billow thunders on the shore.<br/>
<br/>
(Ant. 1)<br/>
On the Labdacidae I see descending<br/>
     Woe upon woe; from days of old some god<br/>
     Laid on the race a malison, and his rod<br/>
Scourges each age with sorrows never ending.<br/>
<br/>
The light that dawned upon its last born son<br/>
     Is vanished, and the bloody axe of Fate<br/>
     Has felled the goodly tree that blossomed late.<br/>
O Oedipus, by reckless pride undone!<br/>
<br/>
(Str. 2)<br/>
Thy might, O Zeus, what mortal power can quell?<br/>
Not sleep that lays all else beneath its spell,<br/>
Nor moons that never tire: untouched by Time,<br/>
          Throned in the dazzling light<br/>
          That crowns Olympus’ height,<br/>
Thou reignest King, omnipotent, sublime.<br/>
<br/>
          Past, present, and to be,<br/>
          All bow to thy decree,<br/>
          All that exceeds the mean by Fate<br/>
          Is punished, Love or Hate.<br/>
<br/>
(Ant. 2)<br/>
Hope flits about never-wearying wings;<br/>
Profit to some, to some light loves she brings,<br/>
But no man knoweth how her gifts may turn,<br/>
Till ’neath his feet the treacherous ashes burn.<br/>
Sure ’twas a sage inspired that spake this word;<br/>
          <i>If evil good appear</i><br/>
          <i>To any, Fate is near</i>;<br/>
And brief the respite from her flaming sword.<br/>
<br/>
          Hither comes in angry mood<br/>
          Haemon, latest of thy brood;<br/>
          Is it for his bride he’s grieved,<br/>
          Or her marriage-bed deceived,<br/>
          Doth he make his mourn for thee,<br/>
          Maid forlorn, Antigone?<br/>
[Enter HAEMON]<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
Soon shall we know, better than seer can tell.<br/>
Learning may fixed decree anent thy bride,<br/>
Thou mean’st not, son, to rave against thy sire?<br/>
Know’st not whate’er we do is done in love?<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
HAEMON.<br/>
O father, I am thine, and I will take<br/>
Thy wisdom as the helm to steer withal.<br/>
Therefore no wedlock shall by me be held<br/>
More precious than thy loving goverance.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
Well spoken: so right-minded sons should feel,<br/>
In all deferring to a father’s will.<br/>
For ’tis the hope of parents they may rear<br/>
A brood of sons submissive, keen to avenge<br/>
Their father’s wrongs, and count his friends their own.<br/>
But who begets unprofitable sons,<br/>
He verily breeds trouble for himself,<br/>
And for his foes much laughter. Son, be warned<br/>
And let no woman fool away thy wits.<br/>
Ill fares the husband mated with a shrew,<br/>
And her embraces very soon wax cold.<br/>
For what can wound so surely to the quick<br/>
As a false friend? So spue and cast her off,<br/>
Bid her go find a husband with the dead.<br/>
For since I caught her openly rebelling,<br/>
Of all my subjects the one malcontent,<br/>
I will not prove a traitor to the State.<br/>
She surely dies. Go, let her, if she will,<br/>
Appeal to Zeus the God of Kindred, for<br/>
If thus I nurse rebellion in my house,<br/>
Shall not I foster mutiny without?<br/>
For whoso rules his household worthily,<br/>
Will prove in civic matters no less wise.<br/>
But he who overbears the laws, or thinks<br/>
To overrule his rulers, such as one<br/>
I never will allow. Whome’er the State<br/>
Appoints must be obeyed in everything,<br/>
But small and great, just and unjust alike.<br/>
I warrant such a one in either case<br/>
Would shine, as King or subject; such a man<br/>
Would in the storm of battle stand his ground,<br/>
A comrade leal and true; but Anarchy—<br/>
What evils are not wrought by Anarchy!<br/>
She ruins States, and overthrows the home,<br/>
She dissipates and routs the embattled host;<br/>
While discipline preserves the ordered ranks.<br/>
Therefore we must maintain authority<br/>
And yield to title to a woman’s will.<br/>
Better, if needs be, men should cast us out<br/>
Than hear it said, a woman proved his match.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CHORUS.<br/>
To me, unless old age have dulled wits,<br/>
Thy words appear both reasonable and wise.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
HAEMON.<br/>
Father, the gods implant in mortal men<br/>
Reason, the choicest gift bestowed by heaven.<br/>
’Tis not for me to say thou errest, nor<br/>
Would I arraign thy wisdom, if I could;<br/>
And yet wise thoughts may come to other men<br/>
And, as thy son, it falls to me to mark<br/>
The acts, the words, the comments of the crowd.<br/>
The commons stand in terror of thy frown,<br/>
And dare not utter aught that might offend,<br/>
But I can overhear their muttered plaints,<br/>
Know how the people mourn this maiden doomed<br/>
For noblest deeds to die the worst of deaths.<br/>
When her own brother slain in battle lay<br/>
Unsepulchered, she suffered not his corse<br/>
To lie for carrion birds and dogs to maul:<br/>
Should not her name (they cry) be writ in gold?<br/>
Such the low murmurings that reach my ear.<br/>
O father, nothing is by me more prized<br/>
Than thy well-being, for what higher good<br/>
Can children covet than their sire’s fair fame,<br/>
As fathers too take pride in glorious sons?<br/>
Therefore, my father, cling not to one mood,<br/>
And deemed not thou art right, all others wrong.<br/>
For whoso thinks that wisdom dwells with him,<br/>
That he alone can speak or think aright,<br/>
Such oracles are empty breath when tried.<br/>
The wisest man will let himself be swayed<br/>
By others’ wisdom and relax in time.<br/>
See how the trees beside a stream in flood<br/>
Save, if they yield to force, each spray unharmed,<br/>
But by resisting perish root and branch.<br/>
The mariner who keeps his mainsheet taut,<br/>
And will not slacken in the gale, is like<br/>
To sail with thwarts reversed, keel uppermost.<br/>
Relent then and repent thee of thy wrath;<br/>
For, if one young in years may claim some sense,<br/>
I’ll say ’tis best of all to be endowed<br/>
With absolute wisdom; but, if that’s denied,<br/>
(And nature takes not readily that ply)<br/>
Next wise is he who lists to sage advice.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CHORUS.<br/>
If he says aught in season, heed him, King.<br/>
(To HAEMON)<br/>
Heed thou thy sire too; both have spoken well.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
What, would you have us at our age be schooled,<br/>
Lessoned in prudence by a beardless boy?<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
HAEMON.<br/>
I plead for justice, father, nothing more.<br/>
Weigh me upon my merit, not my years.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
Strange merit this to sanction lawlessness!<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
HAEMON.<br/>
For evil-doers I would urge no plea.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
Is not this maid an arrant law-breaker?<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
HAEMON.<br/>
The Theban commons with one voice say, No.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
What, shall the mob dictate my policy?<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
HAEMON.<br/>
’Tis thou, methinks, who speakest like a boy.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
Am I to rule for others, or myself?<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
HAEMON.<br/>
A State for one man is no State at all.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
The State is his who rules it, so ’tis held.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
HAEMON.<br/>
As monarch of a desert thou wouldst shine.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
This boy, methinks, maintains the woman’s cause.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
HAEMON.<br/>
If thou be’st woman, yes. My thought’s for thee.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
O reprobate, would’st wrangle with thy sire?<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
HAEMON.<br/>
Because I see thee wrongfully perverse.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
And am I wrong, if I maintain my rights?<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
HAEMON.<br/>
Talk not of rights; thou spurn’st the due of Heaven<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
O heart corrupt, a woman’s minion thou!<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
HAEMON.<br/>
Slave to dishonor thou wilt never find me.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
Thy speech at least was all a plea for her.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
HAEMON.<br/>
And thee and me, and for the gods below.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
Living the maid shall never be thy bride.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
HAEMON.<br/>
So she shall die, but one will die with her.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
Hast come to such a pass as threaten me?<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
HAEMON.<br/>
What threat is this, vain counsels to reprove?<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
Vain fool to instruct thy betters; thou shall rue it.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
HAEMON.<br/>
Wert not my father, I had said thou err’st.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
Play not the spaniel, thou a woman’s slave.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
HAEMON.<br/>
When thou dost speak, must no man make reply?<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
This passes bounds. By heaven, thou shalt not rate<br/>
And jeer and flout me with impunity.<br/>
Off with the hateful thing that she may die<br/>
At once, beside her bridegroom, in his sight.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
HAEMON.<br/>
Think not that in my sight the maid shall die,<br/>
Or by my side; never shalt thou again<br/>
Behold my face hereafter. Go, consort<br/>
With friends who like a madman for their mate.<br/>
[Exit HAEMON]<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CHORUS.<br/>
Thy son has gone, my liege, in angry haste.<br/>
Fell is the wrath of youth beneath a smart.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
Let him go vent his fury like a fiend:<br/>
These sisters twain he shall not save from death.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CHORUS.<br/>
Surely, thou meanest not to slay them both?<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
I stand corrected; only her who touched<br/>
The body.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CHORUS.<br/>
          And what death is she to die?<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
She shall be taken to some desert place<br/>
By man untrod, and in a rock-hewn cave,<br/>
With food no more than to avoid the taint<br/>
That homicide might bring on all the State,<br/>
Buried alive. There let her call in aid<br/>
The King of Death, the one god she reveres,<br/>
Or learn too late a lesson learnt at last:<br/>
’Tis labor lost, to reverence the dead.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CHORUS.<br/>
(Str.)<br/>
Love resistless in fight, all yield at a glance of thine eye,<br/>
Love who pillowed all night on a maiden’s cheek dost lie,<br/>
Over the upland holds. Shall mortals not yield to thee?<br/>
<br/>
(Ant).<br/>
Mad are thy subjects all, and even the wisest heart<br/>
Straight to folly will fall, at a touch of thy poisoned dart.<br/>
Thou didst kindle the strife, this feud of kinsman with kin,<br/>
By the eyes of a winsome wife, and the yearning her heart to win.<br/>
For as her consort still, enthroned with Justice above,<br/>
Thou bendest man to thy will, O all invincible Love.<br/>
<br/>
          Lo I myself am borne aside,<br/>
          From Justice, as I view this bride.<br/>
          (O sight an eye in tears to drown)<br/>
          Antigone, so young, so fair,<br/>
               Thus hurried down<br/>
          Death’s bower with the dead to share.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ANTIGONE.<br/>
(Str. 1)<br/>
Friends, countrymen, my last farewell I make;<br/>
          My journey’s done.<br/>
One last fond, lingering, longing look I take<br/>
          At the bright sun.<br/>
For Death who puts to sleep both young and old<br/>
          Hales my young life,<br/>
And beckons me to Acheron’s dark fold,<br/>
          An unwed wife.<br/>
No youths have sung the marriage song for me,<br/>
          My bridal bed<br/>
No maids have strewn with flowers from the lea,<br/>
          ’Tis Death I wed.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CHORUS.<br/>
          But bethink thee, thou art sped,<br/>
          Great and glorious, to the dead.<br/>
          Thou the sword’s edge hast not tasted,<br/>
          No disease thy frame hath wasted.<br/>
          Freely thou alone shalt go<br/>
          Living to the dead below.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ANTIGONE.<br/>
(Ant. 1)<br/>
Nay, but the piteous tale I’ve heard men tell<br/>
     Of Tantalus’ doomed child,<br/>
Chained upon Siphylus’ high rocky fell,<br/>
     That clung like ivy wild,<br/>
Drenched by the pelting rain and whirling snow,<br/>
     Left there to pine,<br/>
While on her frozen breast the tears aye flow—<br/>
     Her fate is mine.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CHORUS.<br/>
          She was sprung of gods, divine,<br/>
          Mortals we of mortal line.<br/>
          Like renown with gods to gain<br/>
          Recompenses all thy pain.<br/>
          Take this solace to thy tomb<br/>
          Hers in life and death thy doom.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ANTIGONE.<br/>
(Str. 2)<br/>
Alack, alack! Ye mock me. Is it meet<br/>
     Thus to insult me living, to my face?<br/>
Cease, by our country’s altars I entreat,<br/>
     Ye lordly rulers of a lordly race.<br/>
O fount of Dirce, wood-embowered plain<br/>
     Where Theban chariots to victory speed,<br/>
Mark ye the cruel laws that now have wrought my bane,<br/>
     The friends who show no pity in my need!<br/>
Was ever fate like mine? O monstrous doom,<br/>
     Within a rock-built prison sepulchered,<br/>
To fade and wither in a living tomb,<br/>
     And alien midst the living and the dead.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CHORUS.<br/>
(Str. 3)<br/>
          In thy boldness over-rash<br/>
          Madly thou thy foot didst dash<br/>
          ’Gainst high Justice’ altar stair.<br/>
          Thou a father’s guild dost bear.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ANTIGONE.<br/>
(Ant. 2)<br/>
At this thou touchest my most poignant pain,<br/>
     My ill-starred father’s piteous disgrace,<br/>
The taint of blood, the hereditary stain,<br/>
     That clings to all of Labdacus’ famed race.<br/>
Woe worth the monstrous marriage-bed where lay<br/>
     A mother with the son her womb had borne,<br/>
Therein I was conceived, woe worth the day,<br/>
     Fruit of incestuous sheets, a maid forlorn,<br/>
And now I pass, accursed and unwed,<br/>
     To meet them as an alien there below;<br/>
And thee, O brother, in marriage ill-bestead,<br/>
     ’Twas thy dead hand that dealt me this death-blow.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CHORUS.<br/>
          Religion has her chains, ’tis true,<br/>
          Let rite be paid when rites are due.<br/>
          Yet is it ill to disobey<br/>
          The powers who hold by might the sway.<br/>
          Thou hast withstood authority,<br/>
          A self-willed rebel, thou must die.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ANTIGONE.<br/>
Unwept, unwed, unfriended, hence I go,<br/>
     No longer may I see the day’s bright eye;<br/>
Not one friend left to share my bitter woe,<br/>
     And o’er my ashes heave one passing sigh.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
If wail and lamentation aught availed<br/>
To stave off death, I trow they’d never end.<br/>
Away with her, and having walled her up<br/>
In a rock-vaulted tomb, as I ordained,<br/>
Leave her alone at liberty to die,<br/>
Or, if she choose, to live in solitude,<br/>
The tomb her dwelling. We in either case<br/>
Are guiltless as concerns this maiden’s blood,<br/>
Only on earth no lodging shall she find.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ANTIGONE.<br/>
O grave, O bridal bower, O prison house<br/>
Hewn from the rock, my everlasting home,<br/>
Whither I go to join the mighty host<br/>
Of kinsfolk, Persephassa’s guests long dead,<br/>
The last of all, of all more miserable,<br/>
I pass, my destined span of years cut short.<br/>
And yet good hope is mine that I shall find<br/>
A welcome from my sire, a welcome too,<br/>
From thee, my mother, and my brother dear;<br/>
From with these hands, I laved and decked your limbs<br/>
In death, and poured libations on your grave.<br/>
And last, my Polyneices, unto thee<br/>
I paid due rites, and this my recompense!<br/>
Yet am I justified in wisdom’s eyes.<br/>
For even had it been some child of mine,<br/>
Or husband mouldering in death’s decay,<br/>
I had not wrought this deed despite the State.<br/>
What is the law I call in aid? ’Tis thus<br/>
I argue. Had it been a husband dead<br/>
I might have wed another, and have borne<br/>
Another child, to take the dead child’s place.<br/>
But, now my sire and mother both are dead,<br/>
No second brother can be born for me.<br/>
Thus by the law of conscience I was led<br/>
To honor thee, dear brother, and was judged<br/>
By Creon guilty of a heinous crime.<br/>
And now he drags me like a criminal,<br/>
A bride unwed, amerced of marriage-song<br/>
And marriage-bed and joys of motherhood,<br/>
By friends deserted to a living grave.<br/>
What ordinance of heaven have I transgressed?<br/>
Hereafter can I look to any god<br/>
For succor, call on any man for help?<br/>
Alas, my piety is impious deemed.<br/>
Well, if such justice is approved of heaven,<br/>
I shall be taught by suffering my sin;<br/>
But if the sin is theirs, O may they suffer<br/>
No worse ills than the wrongs they do to me.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CHORUS.<br/>
The same ungovernable will<br/>
Drives like a gale the maiden still.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
Therefore, my guards who let her stay<br/>
Shall smart full sore for their delay.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ANTIGONE.<br/>
Ah, woe is me! This word I hear<br/>
Brings death most near.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CHORUS.<br/>
I have no comfort. What he saith,<br/>
Portends no other thing than death.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
ANTIGONE.<br/>
My fatherland, city of Thebes divine,<br/>
Ye gods of Thebes whence sprang my line,<br/>
Look, puissant lords of Thebes, on me;<br/>
The last of all your royal house ye see.<br/>
Martyred by men of sin, undone.<br/>
Such meed my piety hath won.<br/>
[Exit ANTIGONE]<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CHORUS.<br/>
(Str. 1)<br/>
Like to thee that maiden bright,<br/>
          Danae, in her brass-bound tower,<br/>
Once exchanged the glad sunlight<br/>
          For a cell, her bridal bower.<br/>
And yet she sprang of royal line,<br/>
          My child, like thine,<br/>
          And nursed the seed<br/>
          By her conceived<br/>
Of Zeus descending in a golden shower.<br/>
Strange are the ways of Fate, her power<br/>
Nor wealth, nor arms withstand, nor tower;<br/>
Nor brass-prowed ships, that breast the sea<br/>
          From Fate can flee.<br/>
<br/>
(Ant. 1)<br/>
Thus Dryas’ child, the rash Edonian King,<br/>
For words of high disdain<br/>
Did Bacchus to a rocky dungeon bring,<br/>
To cool the madness of a fevered brain.<br/>
          His frenzy passed,<br/>
          He learnt at last<br/>
’Twas madness gibes against a god to fling.<br/>
For once he fain had quenched the Maenad’s fire;<br/>
And of the tuneful Nine provoked the ire.<br/>
<br/>
(Str. 2)<br/>
By the Iron Rocks that guard the double main,<br/>
          On Bosporus’ lone strand,<br/>
Where stretcheth Salmydessus’ plain<br/>
          In the wild Thracian land,<br/>
There on his borders Ares witnessed<br/>
          The vengeance by a jealous step-dame ta’en<br/>
The gore that trickled from a spindle red,<br/>
          The sightless orbits of her step-sons twain.<br/>
<br/>
(Ant. 2)<br/>
Wasting away they mourned their piteous doom,<br/>
The blasted issue of their mother’s womb.<br/>
But she her lineage could trace<br/>
          To great Erecththeus’ race;<br/>
Daughter of Boreas in her sire’s vast caves<br/>
          Reared, where the tempest raves,<br/>
Swift as his horses o’er the hills she sped;<br/>
A child of gods; yet she, my child, like thee,<br/>
               By Destiny<br/>
That knows not death nor age—she too was vanquished.<br/>
[Enter TEIRESIAS and BOY]<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
TEIRESIAS.<br/>
Princes of Thebes, two wayfarers as one,<br/>
Having betwixt us eyes for one, we are here.<br/>
The blind man cannot move without a guide.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
Why tidings, old Teiresias?<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
TEIRESIAS.<br/>
                              I will tell thee;<br/>
And when thou hearest thou must heed the seer.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
Thus far I ne’er have disobeyed thy rede.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
TEIRESIAS.<br/>
So hast thou steered the ship of State aright.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
I know it, and I gladly own my debt.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
TEIRESIAS.<br/>
Bethink thee that thou treadest once again<br/>
The razor edge of peril.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
                         What is this?<br/>
Thy words inspire a dread presentiment.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
TEIRESIAS.<br/>
The divination of my arts shall tell.<br/>
Sitting upon my throne of augury,<br/>
As is my wont, where every fowl of heaven<br/>
Find harborage, upon mine ears was borne<br/>
A jargon strange of twitterings, hoots, and screams;<br/>
So knew I that each bird at the other tare<br/>
With bloody talons, for the whirr of wings<br/>
Could signify naught else. Perturbed in soul,<br/>
I straight essayed the sacrifice by fire<br/>
On blazing altars, but the God of Fire<br/>
Came not in flame, and from the thigh bones dripped<br/>
And sputtered in the ashes a foul ooze;<br/>
Gall-bladders cracked and spurted up: the fat<br/>
Melted and fell and left the thigh bones bare.<br/>
Such are the signs, taught by this lad, I read—<br/>
As I guide others, so the boy guides me—<br/>
The frustrate signs of oracles grown dumb.<br/>
O King, thy willful temper ails the State,<br/>
For all our shrines and altars are profaned<br/>
By what has filled the maw of dogs and crows,<br/>
The flesh of Oedipus’ unburied son.<br/>
Therefore the angry gods abominate<br/>
Our litanies and our burnt offerings;<br/>
Therefore no birds trill out a happy note,<br/>
Gorged with the carnival of human gore.<br/>
O ponder this, my son. To err is common<br/>
To all men, but the man who having erred<br/>
Hugs not his errors, but repents and seeks<br/>
The cure, is not a wastrel nor unwise.<br/>
No fool, the saw goes, like the obstinate fool.<br/>
Let death disarm thy vengeance. O forbear<br/>
To vex the dead. What glory wilt thou win<br/>
By slaying twice the slain? I mean thee well;<br/>
Counsel’s most welcome if I promise gain.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
Old man, ye all let fly at me your shafts<br/>
Like anchors at a target; yea, ye set<br/>
Your soothsayer on me. Peddlers are ye all<br/>
And I the merchandise ye buy and sell.<br/>
Go to, and make your profit where ye will,<br/>
Silver of Sardis change for gold of Ind;<br/>
Ye will not purchase this man’s burial,<br/>
Not though the winged ministers of Zeus<br/>
Should bear him in their talons to his throne;<br/>
Not e’en in awe of prodigy so dire<br/>
Would I permit his burial, for I know<br/>
No human soilure can assail the gods;<br/>
This too I know, Teiresias, dire’s the fall<br/>
Of craft and cunning when it tries to gloss<br/>
Foul treachery with fair words for filthy gain.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
TEIRESIAS.<br/>
Alas! doth any know and lay to heart—<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
Is this the prelude to some hackneyed saw?<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
TEIRESIAS.<br/>
How far good counsel is the best of goods?<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
True, as unwisdom is the worst of ills.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
TEIRESIAS.<br/>
Thou art infected with that ill thyself.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
I will not bandy insults with thee, seer.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
TEIRESIAS.<br/>
And yet thou say’st my prophesies are frauds.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
Prophets are all a money-getting tribe.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
TEIRESIAS.<br/>
And kings are all a lucre-loving race.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
Dost know at whom thou glancest, me thy lord?<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
TEIRESIAS.<br/>
Lord of the State and savior, thanks to me.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
Skilled prophet art thou, but to wrong inclined.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
TEIRESIAS.<br/>
Take heed, thou wilt provoke me to reveal<br/>
The mystery deep hidden in my breast.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
Say on, but see it be not said for gain.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
TEIRESIAS.<br/>
Such thou, methinks, till now hast judged my words.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
Be sure thou wilt not traffic on my wits.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
TEIRESIAS.<br/>
Know then for sure, the coursers of the sun<br/>
Not many times shall run their race, before<br/>
Thou shalt have given the fruit of thine own loins<br/>
In quittance of thy murder, life for life;<br/>
For that thou hast entombed a living soul,<br/>
And sent below a denizen of earth,<br/>
And wronged the nether gods by leaving here<br/>
A corpse unlaved, unwept, unsepulchered.<br/>
Herein thou hast no part, nor e’en the gods<br/>
In heaven; and thou usurp’st a power not thine.<br/>
For this the avenging spirits of Heaven and Hell<br/>
Who dog the steps of sin are on thy trail:<br/>
What these have suffered thou shalt suffer too.<br/>
And now, consider whether bought by gold<br/>
I prophesy. For, yet a little while,<br/>
And sound of lamentation shall be heard,<br/>
Of men and women through thy desolate halls;<br/>
And all thy neighbor States are leagues to avenge<br/>
Their mangled warriors who have found a grave<br/>
I’ the maw of wolf or hound, or winged bird<br/>
That flying homewards taints their city’s air.<br/>
These are the shafts, that like a bowman I<br/>
Provoked to anger, loosen at thy breast,<br/>
Unerring, and their smart thou shalt not shun.<br/>
Boy, lead me home, that he may vent his spleen<br/>
On younger men, and learn to curb his tongue<br/>
With gentler manners than his present mood.<br/>
[Exit TEIRESIAS]<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CHORUS.<br/>
My liege, that man hath gone, foretelling woe.<br/>
And, O believe me, since these grizzled locks<br/>
Were like the raven, never have I known<br/>
The prophet’s warning to the State to fail.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
I know it too, and it perplexes me.<br/>
To yield is grievous, but the obstinate soul<br/>
That fights with Fate, is smitten grievously.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CHORUS.<br/>
Son of Menoeceus, list to good advice.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CHORUS.<br/>
What should I do. Advise me. I will heed.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CHORUS.<br/>
Go, free the maiden from her rocky cell;<br/>
And for the unburied outlaw build a tomb.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
Is that your counsel? You would have me yield?<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CHORUS.<br/>
Yea, king, this instant. Vengeance of the gods<br/>
Is swift to overtake the impenitent.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
Ah! what a wrench it is to sacrifice<br/>
My heart’s resolve; but Fate is ill to fight.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CHORUS.<br/>
Go, trust not others. Do it quick thyself.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
I go hot-foot. Bestir ye one and all,<br/>
My henchmen! Get ye axes! Speed away<br/>
To yonder eminence! I too will go,<br/>
For all my resolution this way sways.<br/>
’Twas I that bound, I too will set her free.<br/>
Almost I am persuaded it is best<br/>
To keep through life the law ordained of old.<br/>
[Exit CREON]<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CHORUS.<br/>
(Str. 1)<br/>
Thou by many names adored,<br/>
          Child of Zeus the God of thunder,<br/>
          Of a Theban bride the wonder,<br/>
Fair Italia’s guardian lord;<br/>
<br/>
In the deep-embosomed glades<br/>
          Of the Eleusinian Queen<br/>
Haunt of revelers, men and maids,<br/>
          Dionysus, thou art seen.<br/>
<br/>
Where Ismenus rolls his waters,<br/>
          Where the Dragon’s teeth were sown,<br/>
Where the Bacchanals thy daughters<br/>
          Round thee roam,<br/>
          There thy home;<br/>
Thebes, O Bacchus, is thine own.<br/>
<br/>
(Ant. 1)<br/>
Thee on the two-crested rock<br/>
          Lurid-flaming torches see;<br/>
Where Corisian maidens flock,<br/>
          Thee the springs of Castaly.<br/>
<br/>
By Nysa’s bastion ivy-clad,<br/>
By shores with clustered vineyards glad,<br/>
There to thee the hymn rings out,<br/>
And through our streets we Thebans shout,<br/>
          All hall to thee<br/>
          Evoe, Evoe!<br/>
<br/>
(Str. 2)<br/>
Oh, as thou lov’st this city best of all,<br/>
To thee, and to thy Mother levin-stricken,<br/>
In our dire need we call;<br/>
Thou see’st with what a plague our townsfolk sicken.<br/>
          Thy ready help we crave,<br/>
Whether adown Parnassian heights descending,<br/>
Or o’er the roaring straits thy swift was wending,<br/>
          Save us, O save!<br/>
<br/>
(Ant. 2)<br/>
Brightest of all the orbs that breathe forth light,<br/>
     Authentic son of Zeus, immortal king,<br/>
Leader of all the voices of the night,<br/>
     Come, and thy train of Thyiads with thee bring,<br/>
          Thy maddened rout<br/>
Who dance before thee all night long, and shout,<br/>
          Thy handmaids we,<br/>
          Evoe, Evoe!<br/>
<br/>
[Enter MESSENGER]<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
MESSENGER.<br/>
Attend all ye who dwell beside the halls<br/>
Of Cadmus and Amphion. No man’s life<br/>
As of one tenor would I praise or blame,<br/>
For Fortune with a constant ebb and rise<br/>
Casts down and raises high and low alike,<br/>
And none can read a mortal’s horoscope.<br/>
Take Creon; he, methought, if any man,<br/>
Was enviable. He had saved this land<br/>
Of Cadmus from our enemies and attained<br/>
A monarch’s powers and ruled the state supreme,<br/>
While a right noble issue crowned his bliss.<br/>
Now all is gone and wasted, for a life<br/>
Without life’s joys I count a living death.<br/>
You’ll tell me he has ample store of wealth,<br/>
The pomp and circumstance of kings; but if<br/>
These give no pleasure, all the rest I count<br/>
The shadow of a shade, nor would I weigh<br/>
His wealth and power ’gainst a dram of joy.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CHORUS.<br/>
What fresh woes bring’st thou to the royal house?<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
MESSENGER.<br/>
Both dead, and they who live deserve to die.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CHORUS.<br/>
Who is the slayer, who the victim? speak.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
MESSENGER.<br/>
Haemon; his blood shed by no stranger hand.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CHORUS.<br/>
What mean ye? by his father’s or his own?<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
MESSENGER.<br/>
His own; in anger for his father’s crime.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CHORUS.<br/>
O prophet, what thou spakest comes to pass.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
MESSENGER.<br/>
So stands the case; now ’tis for you to act.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CHORUS.<br/>
Lo! from the palace gates I see approaching<br/>
Creon’s unhappy wife, Eurydice.<br/>
Comes she by chance or learning her son’s fate?<br/>
[Enter EURYDICE]<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
EURYDICE<br/>
Ye men of Thebes, I overheard your talk.<br/>
As I passed out to offer up my prayer<br/>
To Pallas, and was drawing back the bar<br/>
To open wide the door, upon my ears<br/>
There broke a wail that told of household woe<br/>
Stricken with terror in my handmaids’ arms<br/>
I fell and fainted. But repeat your tale<br/>
To one not unacquaint with misery.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
MESSENGER.<br/>
Dear mistress, I was there and will relate<br/>
The perfect truth, omitting not one word.<br/>
Why should we gloze and flatter, to be proved<br/>
Liars hereafter? Truth is ever best.<br/>
Well, in attendance on my liege, your lord,<br/>
I crossed the plain to its utmost margin, where<br/>
The corse of Polyneices, gnawn and mauled,<br/>
Was lying yet. We offered first a prayer<br/>
To Pluto and the goddess of cross-ways,<br/>
With contrite hearts, to deprecate their ire.<br/>
Then laved with lustral waves the mangled corse,<br/>
Laid it on fresh-lopped branches, lit a pyre,<br/>
And to his memory piled a mighty mound<br/>
Of mother earth. Then to the caverned rock,<br/>
The bridal chamber of the maid and Death,<br/>
We sped, about to enter. But a guard<br/>
Heard from that godless shrine a far shrill wail,<br/>
And ran back to our lord to tell the news.<br/>
But as he nearer drew a hollow sound<br/>
Of lamentation to the King was borne.<br/>
He groaned and uttered then this bitter plaint:<br/>
“Am I a prophet? miserable me!<br/>
Is this the saddest path I ever trod?<br/>
’Tis my son’s voice that calls me. On press on,<br/>
My henchmen, haste with double speed to the tomb<br/>
Where rocks down-torn have made a gap, look in<br/>
And tell me if in truth I recognize<br/>
The voice of Haemon or am heaven-deceived.”<br/>
So at the bidding of our distraught lord<br/>
We looked, and in the craven’s vaulted gloom<br/>
I saw the maiden lying strangled there,<br/>
A noose of linen twined about her neck;<br/>
And hard beside her, clasping her cold form,<br/>
Her lover lay bewailing his dead bride<br/>
Death-wedded, and his father’s cruelty.<br/>
When the King saw him, with a terrible groan<br/>
He moved towards him, crying, “O my son<br/>
What hast thou done? What ailed thee? What mischance<br/>
Has reft thee of thy reason? O come forth,<br/>
Come forth, my son; thy father supplicates.”<br/>
But the son glared at him with tiger eyes,<br/>
Spat in his face, and then, without a word,<br/>
Drew his two-hilted sword and smote, but missed<br/>
His father flying backwards. Then the boy,<br/>
Wroth with himself, poor wretch, incontinent<br/>
Fell on his sword and drove it through his side<br/>
Home, but yet breathing clasped in his lax arms<br/>
The maid, her pallid cheek incarnadined<br/>
With his expiring gasps. So there they lay<br/>
Two corpses, one in death. His marriage rites<br/>
Are consummated in the halls of Death:<br/>
A witness that of ills whate’er befall<br/>
Mortals’ unwisdom is the worst of all.<br/>
[Exit EURYDICE]<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CHORUS.<br/>
What makest thou of this? The Queen has gone<br/>
Without a word importing good or ill.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
MESSENGER.<br/>
I marvel too, but entertain good hope.<br/>
’Tis that she shrinks in public to lament<br/>
Her son’s sad ending, and in privacy<br/>
Would with her maidens mourn a private loss.<br/>
Trust me, she is discreet and will not err.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CHORUS.<br/>
I know not, but strained silence, so I deem,<br/>
Is no less ominous than excessive grief.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
MESSENGER.<br/>
Well, let us to the house and solve our doubts,<br/>
Whether the tumult of her heart conceals<br/>
Some fell design. It may be thou art right:<br/>
Unnatural silence signifies no good.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CHORUS.<br/>
          Lo! the King himself appears.<br/>
          Evidence he with him bears<br/>
          ’Gainst himself (ah me! I quake<br/>
          ’Gainst a king such charge to make)<br/>
          But all must own,<br/>
          The guilt is his and his alone.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
(Str. 1)<br/>
          Woe for sin of minds perverse,<br/>
          Deadly fraught with mortal curse.<br/>
          Behold us slain and slayers, all akin.<br/>
          Woe for my counsel dire, conceived in sin.<br/>
               Alas, my son,<br/>
               Life scarce begun,<br/>
               Thou wast undone.<br/>
          The fault was mine, mine only, O my son!<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CHORUS.<br/>
Too late thou seemest to perceive the truth.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
(Str. 2)<br/>
By sorrow schooled. Heavy the hand of God,<br/>
Thorny and rough the paths my feet have trod,<br/>
Humbled my pride, my pleasure turned to pain;<br/>
Poor mortals, how we labor all in vain!<br/>
[Enter SECOND MESSENGER]<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
SECOND MESSENGER.<br/>
Sorrows are thine, my lord, and more to come,<br/>
One lying at thy feet, another yet<br/>
More grievous waits thee, when thou comest home.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
What woe is lacking to my tale of woes?<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
SECOND MESSENGER.<br/>
Thy wife, the mother of thy dead son here,<br/>
Lies stricken by a fresh inflicted blow.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
(Ant. 1)<br/>
     How bottomless the pit!<br/>
          Does claim me too, O Death?<br/>
          What is this word he saith,<br/>
     This woeful messenger? Say, is it fit<br/>
     To slay anew a man already slain?<br/>
          Is Death at work again,<br/>
     Stroke upon stroke, first son, then mother slain?<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CHORUS.<br/>
Look for thyself. She lies for all to view.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
(Ant. 2)<br/>
Alas! another added woe I see.<br/>
What more remains to crown my agony?<br/>
A minute past I clasped a lifeless son,<br/>
And now another victim Death hath won.<br/>
Unhappy mother, most unhappy son!<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
SECOND MESSENGER.<br/>
Beside the altar on a keen-edged sword<br/>
She fell and closed her eyes in night, but erst<br/>
She mourned for Megareus who nobly died<br/>
Long since, then for her son; with her last breath<br/>
She cursed thee, the slayer of her child.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
(Str. 3)<br/>
          I shudder with affright<br/>
O for a two-edged sword to slay outright<br/>
          A wretch like me,<br/>
          Made one with misery.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
SECOND MESSENGER.<br/>
’Tis true that thou wert charged by the dead Queen<br/>
As author of both deaths, hers and her son’s.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
In what wise was her self-destruction wrought?<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
SECOND MESSENGER.<br/>
Hearing the loud lament above her son<br/>
With her own hand she stabbed herself to the heart.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
(Str. 4)<br/>
I am the guilty cause. I did the deed,<br/>
Thy murderer. Yea, I guilty plead.<br/>
My henchmen, lead me hence, away, away,<br/>
A cipher, less than nothing; no delay!<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CHORUS.<br/>
Well said, if in disaster aught is well<br/>
His past endure demand the speediest cure.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
(Ant. 3)<br/>
          Come, Fate, a friend at need,<br/>
          Come with all speed!<br/>
          Come, my best friend,<br/>
          And speed my end!<br/>
          Away, away!<br/>
Let me not look upon another day!<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CHORUS.<br/>
This for the morrow; to us are present needs<br/>
That they whom it concerns must take in hand.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
I join your prayer that echoes my desire.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CHORUS.<br/>
O pray not, prayers are idle; from the doom<br/>
Of fate for mortals refuge is there none.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CREON.<br/>
(Ant. 4)<br/>
Away with me, a worthless wretch who slew<br/>
Unwitting thee, my son, thy mother too.<br/>
Whither to turn I know now; every way<br/>
          Leads but astray,<br/>
And on my head I feel the heavy weight<br/>
          Of crushing Fate.<br/>
</p>
<p class="drama">
CHORUS.<br/>
     Of happiness the chiefest part<br/>
          Is a wise heart:<br/>
     And to defraud the gods in aught<br/>
          With peril’s fraught.<br/>
     Swelling words of high-flown might<br/>
     Mightily the gods do smite.<br/>
     Chastisement for errors past<br/>
     Wisdom brings to age at last.
</p>